Title: Weak in the Presence of Beauty: Gravitational waves from the mergers of black holes and neutron stars as a messenger

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.16463v1

Published Time: Wed, 16 Sep 2026 00:27:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 94

Markdown Content:
# Weak in the Presence of Beauty: Gravitational waves from the mergers of black holes and neutron stars as a messenger 

Fiona H. Panther a,1 , Jordan W. N. Moncrie ff a,1 , Mac L. Button a,1 

> aSchool of Physics, Mathematics and Computing, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley 6009 WA, Australia
> bOzGrav: The ARC Centre of Excellence for Gravitational-wave Discovery, Australia

Abstract 

In 2025, the 4th Gravitational Wave Transient Catalog reported the discovery of over 200 gravitational wave events since 2015. These gravitational waves (GWs) are emitted by compact binary coalescenses (CBCs) between neutron stars and black holes, and detected with a global network of ground-based laser interferometers. GWs represent a new ‘messenger’ – ripples in spacetime that propagate across cosmological distances, and carry information about the physical properties of compact objects and their location in the Universe. In this review, we consider what information we can learn about black holes and neutron stars using GWs as a messenger. We explore how the GW observation process allows us to transform the outputs of laser interferometers like LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA into knowledge about black holes and neutron stars. We show that the GW source population acts as a messenger that can lead us to breakthroughs in our understanding of stellar evolution, how the Universe has changed across cosmic time, and fundamental physics. Finally, we discuss three key opportunities to learn more about our Universe using GWs as a messenger in the coming decades. 

Keywords: gravitational waves, black hole, neutron star, multimessenger 

1. Introduction 

Although gravity is the weakest of the four funda-mental forces, it shapes the Universe we observe today. In its Newtonian limit, gravity can explain the forma-tion of large scale structure, binding together the largest structures in the Universe like galaxy clusters and the filamentary structure of the cosmic web. However, the General Theory of Relativity (‘general relativity’ or GR, [1]) can explain far more about our Universe than New-tonian gravity, and is rich with predictive power when it comes to phenomena we can observe. The curvature of spacetime close to large masses like planets and stars can bend the path taken by rays of light from distant sources [see 2, for an overview], and causes higher-order corrections to the orbits of planets [3]. These ini-tial predictions were rapidly validated in the early 20th century using light as a messenger. However, not all predictions of GR were so easily tested. Einstein ob-served that his field equations had wavelike solutions -small perturbations of spacetime that propagate at the speed of light that Einstein initially dismissed only as a mathematical curiosity. The work of Trautmann and Robinson, inspired by Infeld’s e ff ective field theory, identified that GWs must exist in nature [4]. Confir-mation of this work followed with observations of the Hulse-Taylor double pulsar [5]. However, the evidence for GW emission was here only indirect, inferred from the shortening of the orbital period of the two bodies as conveyed through the time di ff erences between succes-sive pulses of electromagnetic radiation. Here, the pre-diction that gravitational waves must exist in our phys-ical world was tested using light as a messenger. How-ever, to truly test Einstein’s theory, a direct observation of these ripples in spacetime was required. Such a measurement came in 2015 when GW150914, the merger of two ∼ 30 M ⊙ black holes was detected [6] by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational wave Ob-servatory (LIGO) [7]. Since then, the field of gravi-tational wave astrophysics has gone from the ground-breaking first discovery of a merging compact binary, to the detection of such events becoming commonplace [8] with a global network of interferometers (LIGO, Virgo [9, 10], KAGRA [11, 12, 13] and until recently, GEO600 [14]). A single gravitational wave event acts as a messen-ger, carrying with it information about the two merging compact objects (COs) (or any other physical system arXiv:2609.16463v1 [gr-qc] 15 Sep 2026 with a time-varying quadrupole moment). From an ob-servation of a gravitational wave, we can infer the prop-erties of black holes and neutron stars from billions of light years away. A small fraction of these events are expected to emit detectable electromagnetic radiation, when matter is accelerated close to the speed of light in the extremes of curved spacetime created by merg-ing neutron stars. This was the case with the detection of the first binary neutron star merger GW170817 [15] - an event that allowed us to view the moments before and during the merger through the emission of gravi-tational waves. The electromagnetic emission associ-ated with GW170817 allowed us to study the behavior of the matter left behind. This formed a radioactively-powered kilonova [16] and a relativistic jet. Such mul-timessenger events o ff er prized opportunities beyond merely measuring the properties of black holes and neu-tron stars, acting as beacons to enable precision mea-surements of the expansion rate of the Universe by ex-ploiting the ‘standard siren’ property of GWs [17]. With over 200 compact binary coalescences (CBCs, the collective term for binary neutron star, neutron star-black hole, and binary black hole mergers) detected and reported in the 4th Gravitational Wave Transient Cata-log [8], we now have more power than ever to use GWs as a messenger to glean information about the Universe. The GW population acts as a messenger, one that can only emerge once hundreds of events have been de-tected [18]. This is the era we now enter in GW as-trophysics: one where population-level inferences can be made about stellar evolution, compact object forma-tion, cosmology and fundamental physics. These infer-ences make a GW source population more than merely the sum of its parts. This review will concentrate on gravitational wave transients observed by ground-based gravitational wave detectors: CBCs where emission can be characterized by some finite start and /or end time (whether that is in passing through the LIGO frequency band, or the emis-sion is halted by some physical process). It is set out as follows: We will first review how gravitational waves can convey information about their sources in Section 2. In Section 3 we will review the methods of gravi-tational wave detection, with a particular focus on the relationship between GW as a carrier of astrophysical information, and how the detection process allows us to optimally extract this information. In Section 4, we will review how the population of CBC sources acts as a messenger about the astrophysics of compact binary ob-ject formation. In Section 5, we see how individual GW events exhibit higher-order e ff ects that allow us to more definitively probe hypotheses about compact binary for-mation and the General Theory of Relativity. In Sec-tion 6 we discuss searches for coincident electromag-netic emission from merging compact binaries, and the successes and challenges presented by this work. We in-vestigate how GWs can serve as a messenger of funda-mental physics in Section 7. Finally, we discuss two po-tential avenues for GWs as a messenger of astrophysics in Section 8, motivated by the work of the authors of this review. 

2. Gravitational Waves as a messenger ϕorb  

> ˆx
> ˆy
> ˆz⃗ Lm2m1⃗S2⃗S1
> Figure 1: Basic properties and geometry of a compact binary system

For a binary system (Fig 1) composed of two compact objects with masses m1 + m2 = M located at a distance 

dL and chirp mass [19] 

M = (m1m2)3/5

(m1 + m2)1/5 , (1) the gravitational wave strain can be expressed as the sum of two independent and orthogonal polarisations 

h(t) = h+(t) + h×(t) in the time domain as 

h+ = A(t)

 1 + cos 2 ι

2



cos 2 ϕorb (t), (2) 

h× = A(t) cos ι sin 2 ϕorb (t). (3) Where A(t) is given by 

A(t) = GM

dLc2

 tc − tGM/c3

−1/4

. (4) 

tc is the time of coalescence, G = 6.67 ×

10 −11 m3kg −1s−2 is the gravitational constant and c is the speed of light. The inclination angle ι is the angle of in-clination of the orbital plane relative to the observer. We can easily see from Equation 2 that the frequency evolu-tion and duration of the waveform observed by ground-based GW detectors is related to the chirp mass of the 2system: more massive binary systems produce larger amplitude and lower frequency signals than low mass binaries at the same luminosity distance, and merge at lower frequencies (Fig. 2). The term ϕorb is the angle between m1 and the x-axis at some time t (Fig. 1). Energy loss from the system through the emission of GWs leads to the time evolu-tion of ϕorb . It is possible to express the orbital phase in terms of the gravitational phase ϕ as 2ϕorb = ϕ(t) + ϕc (5) where ϕc is the phase at the time of coalescence tc.Hence, ϕ(t) contains all the information about the time evolution of the phase due to GW emission and general-relativistic corrections to the orbits. For example, at sec-ond post-Newtonian order, the orbital phase of a non-spinning binary evolves as 

ϕ(t) = − 2

η



Θ(t)5/8 +

 3715 8064 + 55 96 η



Θ(t)3/8

− 3π

4 Θ(t)1/4+

 9275495 14450688 + 284875 258048 η+ 1855 2048 η2



Θ(t)1/8



(6) where η = μ/ M is the symmetric mass ratio and ϕc is the orbital phase at t = tc and 

Θ(t) = c3η(tc − t)6GM (7) is the dimensionless time parameter. A measurement of the gravitational wave strain h therefore conveys infor-mation about the source of the gravitational waves: both intrinsic properties such as the masses and mass ratio of the merging compact objects, and the extrinsic proper-ties of the binary system such as its inclination angle and distance from the observer. From Equation 6 we observe that higher order corrections to the waveform will be most readily detectable through the time evolu-tion of the orbital phase for highly asymmetric systems. The post-Newtonian (PN) relativistic corrections that aff ect the phase evolution of the merging binary can be explored through numerical relativity simulations. Restricted post-Newtonian waveforms that incorporate corrections in the orbital phase such as in Equation 6 have proven to be more than adequate for searches for compact binary coalescenses and, in many cases, pa-rameter estimation. Both of these tasks require paramet-ric waveform models that can be evaluated with mini-mal computation time. A comprehensive discussion of computing post-Netwonian corrections and applications of numerical relativity simulations to compute high-precision waveform models can be found in [22].     

> Figure 2: Gravitational waveforms from non-spinning binary black holes with di ff erent chirp masses. Larger chirp mass systems produce shorter signals with lower merger frequencies. The chosen compo-nent masses represent the gravitational waves detected from events GW150914 and GW190521, simulated using IMRPhenomXPHM [20] using the PyCBC software library [21]

2.1. The e ff ects of spin, eccentricity, and tidal deforma-bility 

Astrophysical BHs are characterized by their mass and their spin S (Fig 1). For each compact object in a merging system, the spin is often expressed in terms of the dimensionless spin, 

χi ≡ cSi

Gm 2

> i

. (8) The orientation and magnitude of the BH spins are de-termined by processes that occur during stellar evolu-tion, and dynamical interactions between the black hole and its environment. We explore the importance of spin in constraining the processes that occur during BBH for-mation and evolution in Section 4. The inspiral rate (and hence phase evolution) of the inspiral is determined by the mass ratio, as above, with an additional contribution from the spins parallel to the orbital angular momen-tum (e.g. see [22]). The e ff ect on the waveform can be quantified using the e ff ective spin parameter χeff [23] 

χeff = (χ1 + qχ2) · ˆL

1 + q , (9) where ˆ L is the unit vector in the direction of the orbital angular momentum L and q = m2/m1 is the mass ra-tio of the two COs. Positive values of χeff indicate that black hole spins are net aligned with the orbital angular momentum (‘prograde’), and negative values indicate a net anti-alignment (‘retrograde’). Small values of χeff 

are consistent with either small and randomly-oriented 3spins, or spins that lie within the orbital plane (both of which render the dot product in Eq. 9 small). As χeff 

appears at low orders in post-Newtonian corrections to the waveform phase, and because it is a constant of the motion at second PN order, it can be well constrained in comparison to the individual component spins [24]. In population analysis, measurements of the distribution of 

χeff are used to constrain CO formation scenarios [25], as isolated binary formation and dynamical formation result in di ff erent distributions of χeff due to the assump-tion that BH spins tend to align during isolated stellar evolution [although see 26, and references therein for a discussion as to why this assumption may be flawed.].                

> Figure 3: BH spin induces additional phasing of ϕorb during the in-spiral. A 30 +32 M⊙non-spinning system (solid line) is shown in comparison to a system with non-zero spins aligned with ⃗L, where
> χ1z=0.9, χ 2z=0.3, χ eff ≈0.6. Waveforms generated using the
> IMRPhenomXPHM waveform approximant [20] and the PyCBC software library [21].

In the case considered in Figure 3, the black hole spins are aligned with the orbital angular momentum of the system. However, if the spins of the individual black holes are misaligned with the orbital angular momen-tum (as might be expected if black hole binaries form through dynamical capture), the misalignment results in the precession of both the orbital plane and the spin vec-tors. The magnitude of the spin precession induced by these misalignments leads to additional amplitude and phase modulations in the waveform with respect to the spin-aligned case. By averaging the time-dependent ef-fects of spin precession [e.g. see 27], we can define the eff ective spin precession parameter 

χp = Max 



χ1 sin θ1,

 4q + 34 + 3q



qχ2 sin θ2



, (10) to quantify the degree to which precession impacts the phase and amplitude modulation of the waveform. Here, θi is the angle between the orbital angular mo-mentum vector ⃗ L, and the spin vector ⃗ S of BH i. Two phenomena contribute to the modulation of the wave-form and to the measurable value of χp: the magnitude of the spins in the orbital plane oscillate around a mean value, and the relative angle between the spin vectors in the plane change continuously as the black holes orbit. The e ff ect of spin precession is more pronounced for unequal mass binaries where q ≪ 1 - searches for evi-dence of spin precession have therefore focused on the most unequal-mass systems identified by the LVK (see Section 5.1). However, the e ff ects of spin precession are easily confounded by the presence of noise transients, and it is challenging to distinguish between the e ff ects of spin precession and binary eccentricity.        

> Figure 4: Comparison between waveform produced by a spin-precessing BBH binary with the same masses in Fig. 3 ( χp=0.56) with a non-spinning binary (bottom trace, solid) and a spin-aligned, non-precessing binary (top trace). The precession of the orbital plane causes additional amplitude and phase modulations relative to both the non-spinning and spin-aligned waveform. Waveforms generated using IMRPhenomXPHM and PyCBC [20, 21]

2.2. Binary eccentricity 

A further phenomenon that has a modulating e ff ect on the inspiral waveform’s amplitude and frequency is that of binary eccentricity. Substantially eccentric bi-naries display substantial amplitude modulation due to the close approach between the bodies at pericenter re-leasing orbital energy from the system at an enhanced rate compared to a circularised binary. Relativistic ef-fects also lead to apsidal precession of the orbit. These eff ects compound, causing the orbit to circularise over many periods. This means that eccentricity that is de-tected during the last few moments of the inspiral pro-vides compelling evidence for relatively recent dynami-cal interactions, as the system has not had time to cir-cularise. A measurement of non-zero eccentricity is therefore a smoking gun for the dynamical formation of black holes. 4Observationally, eccentric mergers exhibit qualita-tively similar amplitude and phase modulations as pre-cessing systems and can be hard to distinguish [28]. There have been numerous e ff orts to develop eccen-tric waveform models (summarised in references in [29]) that can be e ffi ciently computed to incorporate them into parameter estimation e ff orts [Models such as 

SEOBNRv4EHM and TEOBResumS-Dalí ; 30, 31]. One complicating factor that makes eccentricity challenging to understand is the lack of a standardised definition of eccentricity in the General Theory of relativity that can be propagated into waveform models [29, 32], and describing eccentric orbits requires the introduction of three additional parameters to describe the orbits of the COs: eccentricity, mean anomaly, and either the true anomaly or an alternative parameterisation to describe the size of the orbit. Eccentricity is di ffi cult to measure at current detec-tor sensitivities, but will be a key observable for next-generation ground- [33] and space-based [34, 35] grav-itational wave detectors. Future ground-based detectors will probe earlier inspiral stages where residual eccen-tricity is more readily measured, while space-based de-tectors such as LISA are sensitive at lower frequencies, enabling observations of binaries long before merger when eccentricity is largest [36]. Highly eccentric systems may also produce periodic bursts of higher-frequency emission during pericenter passage [37], of-fering a potential multiband synergy between ground-and space-based observatories. LISA will additionally be sensitive to extreme mass ratio inspirals (EMRIs) — stellar-mass black holes merging with supermassive black holes — at frequen-cies well below ground-based detector bandwidths, where eccentricity serves as a key discriminant between formation channels such as loss-cone scattering and disk-driven migration [38, 39]. More broadly, the dis-tinct eccentricity distributions predicted by di ff erent for-mation scenarios — including BBH–SMBH triples [40] and various dynamical channels — make eccentricity a powerful probe of binary formation across detector bands [34]. 

2.3. Tidal deformability 

The e ff ects of spin on the inspiral waveforms emitted by merging neutron stars are less severe - binary neutron stars (BNSs) are thought to generally have small spin magnitudes as only around 4% of systems are expected to have ∼ ms spin periods [41]. Although BNS spins are thought to be small, they can a ff ect the overall infer-ence of masses [42], as high and low spin priors yield subtle di ff erences in the measured component masses of events like GW190425 [43]. Merging BNS systems are also expected to almost exclusively arise from isolated binary evolution - simulations of dynamical compact object formation suggest that less than a few percent of low-mass CO binaries form through gravitational cap-ture [44, 45]. The emission of GWs during the early inspiral ( fGW ≪ 10 Hz is also expected to damp any ec-centricity the BNS system retains from processes that occur during isolated stellar evolution [46, 47, 48] For this reason, BNS systems are expected to have aligned spins and circularized orbits. There are, however, other important physical properties of neutron stars that can aff ect the phase and amplitude evolution of the late BNS inspiral (i.e. observed at frequencies f > 10 Hz) that means waveform models must encompass additional parameters. Unlike black holes, neutron stars can be tidally de-formed. The extent to which a neutron star can be tidally deformed depends strongly on the neutron star matter equation of state (EoS) which fixes the neutron star radius R for a given mass m [see 49, for a review]. In the context of GW emission, the phase and ampli-tude evolution of the inspiral signal depends on the tidal Love number λi = Q/ϵ where Q is the tidally-induced quadrupole deformation of the ith star and ϵ is the tidal potential induced by the binary companion [50]. The dimensionless tidal deformability of the ith neutron star is given by [e.g. 51] 

Λi = λi

m2

> i

= 2k2,i

3

 c2RGm i

5

. (11) Because the term k2, i is an equation-of-state and com-pactness dependent parameter [52], allowing a measure-ment of Λi from the waveform to be transformed into an insight into the EoS [53]. The tidal deformation of the neutron stars accelerates the merger, and its e ff ects on the frequency evolution of the waveform can be used to quantify the e ff ective tidal deformability ( ˜ Λ) of the bi-nary system [54]. The e ff ective tidal deformability is a dimensionless combination of the component masses and tidal deformabilities, and is given by [e.g. 51] ˜Λ = 16 13 

 (m1 + 12 m2)m41Λ1 + (m2 + 12 m1)m42Λ2

(m1 + m2)5



.

(12) Depending on the accuracy with which the BNS com-ponent masses and spins can be measured, a measure of the NS tidal deformability with GWs can be con-verted into a strong constraint on the neutron star EOS and measurements of the neutron star radius to within 

δrNS ∼ 1 km [55]. 5Tidal deformability is also measurable from NSBH waveforms in-principle. However, it is expected that most NSBH mergers do not involve the tidal disruption of the NS component unless the mass ratio of the system is small ( q < 1/6), the black hole spin is significantly prograde ( χ1 ≥ 0.5) or the neutron star radius is large (potentially implying a soft NS EOS) [56, 57, 58]. Sys-tems comprising these properties are likely challenging to achieve in nature unless binary systems undergo mass ratio reversal, or the star that leaves behind the NS com-ponent evolves more rapidly, leaving the progenitor of the BH companion to be spun up. Nevertheless, iden-tifying one component of a putative NSBH merger to have a non-zero tidal deformability (or, more specifi-cally, k2 > 0) provides the most concrete evidence that there is a neutron star present in the binary. Wave-form models that incorporate this e ff ect are based on NR simulations, or can be emulated with phenomenological modelling that truncates the waveform at frequencies of 

∼ 1500 Hz, corresponding to the last stable orbit before the NS is tidally disrupted [e.g. 59]. 

2.4. Higher order multipoles 

GW emission is quadurpolar. Consequently, the fundamental (2,2) quadrupolar mode dominates the observed GW signal at current detector sensitivities. Higher order multipole moments also contribute to the energy loss from the system (Fig. 5), especially if a system is oriented edge-on with respect to the observer. Consequently, the signal-to-noise ratio (and hence ob-servability) of these higher harmonics in the inspiral de-pends on a number of factors, including the orientation of the binary, the total binary mass, and the binary mass ratio [60], . The observation of these higher order har-monics adds to the available evidence that the General Theory of Relativity is an accurate description of grav-itation in extreme spacetime conditions. Through ad-vances in numerical relativity and semi-analytic mod-elling, there is now an abundance of models that de-scribe the contributions of higher harmonics to the GW signals we can observe with ground-based detectors [61]. This has enabled the detection of signals that ex-hibit strong evidence for the presence of higher order harmonics (see Section 5.3), although these observa-tions can be confounded by non-stationary noise in de-tectors in much the same way detection of precession and eccentricity is challenging. Non-stationary noise can induce variations in the phasing and amplitude mod-ulation of the overall detected signal that are indistin-guishable from higher order multipoles at current de-tector sensitivity. Beyond validating GR, observation of higher order modes can help in breaking the ι − dL de-generacy that is present in the (2 , 2) quadrupole mode. This is because the directional dependence of the emis-sion of the (2 , 1) , (3 , 2) , (3 , 3) and (4 , 4) harmonics rela-tive to the orbital plane allows the discrimination of the inclination angle of the binary ι [62]. This has impor-tant consequences for gravitational wave cosmology, as it can be used to reduce uncertainties in dL that propa-gate into the inference of the expansion rate of the Uni-verse.                  

> Figure 5: Higher order multipoles generated by a merging BBH sys-tem with m1=40 M⊙,m2=10 M⊙and ι∼80 deg. Higher order mul-tipoles from high-mass ratio, edge-on CBCs make a non-negligible contribution to the overall detected signal-to-noise ratio. The strain amplitude of each of the multipoles is shown in the top panel. The overall observed waveform is shown in the lower panel. The visi-ble mis-match between the sum of all multipolar modes and the (2,2) mode shows the importance of including higher-order multipoles in the study of CBCs with large mass ratios. Waveforms are geenrated with the SEOBNRv4HM waveform model [61] and PyCBC [21]

3. The detection of gravitational waves with ground-based laser interferometers 

Modern gravitational wave detectors are based on the Michelson interferometer. The mirrors of a gravita-tional wave interferometer can be suspended in such a way that they occupy an inertial reference frame, mak-ing them ‘test masses’ that are freely falling, indepen-dent of the local gravitational potential of the Earth. Any change in the relative distance between the central beam splitter and the test masses (for example, the tiny displacements induced by a passing gravitational wave) causes changes in the interference pattern measured at the output photodetector. The measurable length change 

∆L induced by a gravitational wave depends on the total length of the interferometer arms. In the limit that the 6arm length L ≪ λGW , the gravitational wave strain can be measured to first order as 

h(t) ≈ ∆L(t)

L (13) where h(t) is the dimensionless gravitational wave ‘strain’. There are numerous sources of frequency-dependent (colored) noise in gravitational wave detectors that af-fect the precision with which we measure the arm length 

L over time [63]. This includes Newtonian noise at low frequencies from seismic disturbances, thermal noise from vibration of the mirrors and suspension system that alter arm lengths L, and quantum noise that arises from the photodetector. Each of these noise sources follow a stationary Gaussian process and can hence be char-acterised by the one-sided noise power spectral density 

S n( f ), where 2E(˜ n( f )∗ ˜n( f ′)) ≡ S n(| f |)δ( f − f ′) (14) where δ( f ) is the Dirac delta function. It is worthwhile to be sure of the convention being used for the calcu-lation of the PSD in gravitational wave applications, as there may be inconsistencies in whether the one- or two-sided PSD is used. A GW interferometer is not uniformly sensitive to gravitational waves from all sky locations - the orien-tation of the detector arms relative to the gravitational wave source modulates the sensitivity of the detector according to the antenna response function. The ob-served strain hobs (t) measured by the interferometer can be written as 

hobs (t) = F+h+(t) + F×h×(t) (15) where F+/× depend on the three angles defining the sky position and polarization basis of the gravitational wave source with respect to a reference coordinate system. For example, when using equatorial coordinates they are a function of right ascension, declination and po-larization angle as well as the detector location and the sidereal time. Most computer packages designed for de-tection and parameter estimation of gravitational wave signals [e.g. 64, 21, 65, 66] o ff er routines to directly compute the antenna pattern functions. GW detectors are most sensitive to sources that are directly above or below the plane that is defined by the plane spanned by the detector arms. 1

> 1Technically the antenna response functions are not frequency in-dependent, however this only becomes a problem when the wave-length of the gravitational wave becomes comparable to the detector arm length.

3.1. Modelled searches 

A comprehensive overview of how GW searches are performed by the LVK collaboration, including how data is calibrated, terrestrial noise vetoed, and how searches and approaches to the construction of GW cat-alogs have changed over time can be found in [67]. In this review, we will briefly discuss the principles of GW detection and parameter estimation. The detection of gravitational wave signals using matched filtering against a known template waveform is based on a frequentist approach to hypothesis testing [68]. To detect gravitational wave signals, we must de-cide whether the available evidence favors the the null hypothesis 2,

HN : d(t) = n(t), (16) i.e. d(t) = n(t), or whether there is also a GW sig-nal h(t, θ) described by parameters θ present in the data stream 

HS : d(t) = h(t, θ) + n(t). (17) In this case, the likelihood ratio test statistic is equiv-alent to the matched filter output between the detector data d(t) and a filter h that maximizes the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, typically denoted ρ) [68]. It can be shown [e.g. 69] that the complex matched-filter output be-tween the template h and data d(t) at time t is 

z(t) = 4

Z ∞

> 0

˜d( f )˜ h∗( f )

S n(| f |) exp(2 iπ f t )d f . (18) We normalize the filter output z using the variance of the template 

σ2 = 4

Z ∞

> 0

|˜h( f )|2

S n(| f |) d f (19) which accounts for the fact that the sensitivity of the in-strument to a given template signal h is not uniform. We can then write the real-valued SNR timeseries ρ(t) as the absolute value of the two-phase matched-filter output 

ρ(t) = |z(t)|

σ . (20) which has the appealing property that ρ2 follows a χ2-distribution with two degrees of freedom [70] and there-fore it is trivial to compute the probability of finding any SNR value greater than some threshold ρthresh as 

P(ρ2 > ρ 2thresh ) = e−ρ2thresh /2. (21)    

> 2We have used HNto denote the null hypothesis to distinguish it from H0, the Hubble constant, discussed later in this review.

7while the expectation value of ρ2 in the presence of a gravitational wave signal is 

E(ρ2) = E(|z|2)

σ2 . (22) In practice, a matched-filter search for signals using a single template waveform h(t) discretises the computa-tion of the matched-filter output, and then identifies the time (and phase, for the two-phase filter) at which this output is locally maximized [e.g. 71, 69]. To e ffi ciently search for gravitational waves from CBCs, millions of templates for waveforms computed for merging CBCs with masses mi ∼ 1 − 400 M ⊙ must be used [e.g. as discussed in 72]. Template banks are designed by plac-ing the smallest number of templates into a geometric grid of component masses that still maximises the over-lap between putative signals. A number of algorithms have been developed to do this [e.g. 73, 74], however as the parameter space increases in complexity, stochas-tic bank generation has emerged as the most e ffi cient way to develop template banks [e.g. 75, 76], especially for searches that incorporate higher-order e ff ects such as eccentricity, spin precession and higher order modes. The SNR timeseries’ that are produced by filtering GW detector data against this template bank can then be searched for ‘foreground triggers’ that satisfy some threshold criteria for being ‘signal-like’. Typically, this requires time coincidence between foreground triggers that exceed a limiting SNR threshold: The GW must arrive within the light travel time between detectors (al-though most searches can identify GW signals present in only one detector data stream, albeit at lower sensitiv-ity). To reduce the impact of non-stationary noise, fore-ground trigggers must also satisfy some goodness-of-fit criterion between template and putative signal, such as that introduced in [70]. Each foreground trigger that satisfies these criteria (typically ∼ 1 s −1), is then ranked against a background noise distribution. In theory, one can compute the false alarm probability of any signal with ρ > ρ thresh using Equation 21. However, this assumes that the back-ground noise in the detector is purely Gaussian. We know that this is not the case: So-called ‘glitches’ in the detector strain [77] can be caused by everything from short fluctuations in the laser systems or control systems of the interferometer, to seismic disturbances, lightning or animal activity, to human activity at the detector sites [78]. These glitches create triggers that accumulate as heavy tails in the background distribu-tion of ρ measured by the GW detection pipelines, de-grading sensitivity to weak signals under the assump-tion that the detector noise is purely Gaussian. To mit-igate this e ff ect, the background distribution of the de-tection statistic ρ is calculated empirically from detec-tor data streams where coherence and coincidence infor-mation is destroyed by performing ‘time slides’ [79] of one detector data stream relative to another. This data is then used to obtain a representative sample of the ‘background’ against which candidates from a coher-ent search can then be ranked to generate a false alarm probability (FAP). This is converted to a false alarm rate (FAR) by dividing by the total observation time it takes to acquire the background. In general, the FAR scales with the SNR as [80] FAR ∝ 10 −ζρ (23) where the constant ζ ∼ 2 and the constant of proportion-ality are deduced based on the observed detector noise trigger rate. Foreground triggers that satisfy specific cri-teria, including passing a threshold FAR are considered GW candidates, and are further scrutinised to evaluate whether they are consistent with a CBC event. 

3.2. Unmodelled searches 

Matched filtering allows us to search gravitational wave detector data for known unknowns : that is, we know we are searching for coalescing compact binary systems, we merely do not know detailed physical in-formation about these systems. However, there are many sources of gravitational waves that cannot be so comprehensively modelled that are still of substantial interest. As noted above, any mass distribution with a non-zero time-varying quadrupole moment can emit gravitational waves that can, in principle, be detected by ground-based laser interferometer experiments pro-vided their frequencies lie within the sensitive band of the detector and their amplitude is su ffi ciently large. Al-though unmodelled searches such as [81, 82] are gen-erally less sensitive than optimal matched-filter based searches, unmodelled search algorithms have the bene-fit of being sensitive to signals that are not well repre-sented in matched filter template banks. These include phenonena such as GWs produced by eccentric binaries and signals with a substantial higher-order mode con-tent, as well as CCSNe and other short-duration burst sources [83]. 

3.3. Single-event parameter estimation 

The detection of gravitational wave transients -whether from modelled or unmodelled searches - repre-sents only one part of a closely-coupled problem. While GW searches may give a rough indication of the nature and properties of the gravitational wave source, more 8refined inference is required to probe what sort of as-trophysical (or more exotic) phenomenon produced the ripples in spacetime. Provided we have a parametric physical model of the GW source, it is possible to es-timate the parameters of that source. The most estab-lished method to do so is through Bayesian inference. A detailed discussion of the evolution of GW parameter estimation can be found in [84]. Gravitational wave emission from (quasi-circular, non-precessing, non-tidally deformable) CBCs that can be described by a complete set of 15 parameters θ re-lated to the physical properties of the system [85, 65, 86]. This framework can be extended to any GW source for which we have a parametric model h(t, θ), for ex-ample signals from post-merger neutron stars and CC-NSe [83]. For a signal h(t, θ) in Gaussian noise, the log-likelihood can be written ln L(si| θi) ∝ ⟨ si − h(θi), si − h(θi)⟩ (24) where 

⟨a, b⟩ = 4Re 

Z ∞

> 0

d f ˜a( f )˜ b⋆( f )

S h( f ) . (25) is the inner product and S n(| f |) is the noise power spec-tral density defined above. This likelihood is called the Whittle likelihood. When combining multiple obser-vatories, L(si| θi) ∝ Q j L(s ji | θi). That is, in the log-likelihood, the combined multi-observatory likelihood is the sum of each individual observatory log-likehood under the reliable assumption noise in each observatory is uncorrellated, see Fig. 6. The Whittle likelihood is generic to any problem where a well-modelled signal 

h(t) is superimposed with additive Gaussian noise. This expression should already seem familiar from our dis-cussion of the construction of the optimal filter for GW detection: the SNR is proportional to the square root of the profile likelihood ratio that can be derived from the Whittle likelihood. The problem of parameter estimation recasts the fre-quentist detection problem ‘is there any segment of data that is not consistent with the noise hypothesis given our point estimate for the parameter values I am as-suming to generate the waveform I am filtering with?’ .Bayes theorem allows us to construct posterior proba-bility distributions on each parameter θ of the waveform model, allowing us to quantify our belief in the value of each parameter, as opposed to a single point estimate. This requires us to have some reasonable expectation on the prior probability distribution of each parameter π(θ)(which can be agnostic or informed by astrophysics). We also need an understanding of the data generation process, which is encapsulated in the likelihood func-tion. The likelihood tells us the probability of measuring data d given the parameters θ. We can then use Bayes theorem to construct the ’posterior’ probability distribu-tion on the parameters θ

P(θ|d) ∝ L (d| θ)π(θ). (26) The constant of proportionality missing from this equa-tion is referred to as the evidence Z,

Z =

Z

> θ

L(d| θ)π(θ)dθ (27) This corresponds to a normalisation term, but it also plays an important role in hypothesis testing in grav-itational wave astronomy. To select between di ff er-ent waveform models that incorporate e ff ects like spin precession or higher order modes, for example, one can construct an odds ratio that incorporates the evi-dence Z as a measure of whether the data ‘prefers’ one model over another according to the information con-tent. Generally, the evidence is computationally expen-sive to compute as it requires one to numerically inte-grate over a high-dimensional parameter space. How-ever, the structure of the gravitational wave likelihood lends itself well to the use of nested sampling [87] algo-rithms to estimate the posterior probability distribution, calculating the evidence ‘for free’ along the way. 

3.4. Low-latency detection of gravitational waves 

Gravitational wave detector data can be analysed for the presence of astrophysical signals in close-to real time. Development of these searches has been strongly motivated by interest in the coincident detection of GW emission and electromagnetic or neutrino emission from merging compact objects. A number of gravitational wave detection pipelines search data in real-time, in-cluding 

• Modelled search pipelines PyCBC Live [21, 88], GstLAL [89, 90], MBTA [91, 92], and SPIIR [93, 94], 

• Unmodelled search pipeline cWB [81], 

• Weakly-modelled searches incorporating machine learning techniques: Aframe [95] and cWB-BBH [81, 96] (and references in [67]). These pipelines analyse data acquired by the LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA interferometers in real-time, and 9have done so since the beginning of the advanced de-tector era 3. Since the beginning of the third observing run (O3), alerts were released to the general public. Although GW detection algorithms can operate with little to no time delay between data acquisition and anal-ysis due to low computational overheads, until recent years the parameter estimation process has operated at much higher latencies, typically on the order of sev-eral hours, to several days [97]. This, coupled with in-terest in following up GW detections with electromag-netic telescopes with limited fields of view, has moti-vated the development of rapid parameter estimation al-gorithms. BAYESTAR [98] is used to compute localiza-tion of CBC sources in low-latency, producing skymaps that can be ingested by followup campaigns. Over time, software developments have reduced both detection and parameter estimation latencies [72]. For example, the implementation of algorithms on GPUs [99, 100] has provided substantial speed-up of both matched filter-ing and parameter estimation. A variety of other data processing techniques have also shaved o ff critical frac-tions of a second in latency, including time-domain data whitening [101]. In the context of parameter estima-tion, latencies have been substantially reduced thanks to the advent of massively parallel implementations of nested sampling and the development of new frame-works to assist in the parameter estimation workflow [102, 103, 104, 105]. Machine learning has also been used to great e ff ect in GW detection and parameter es-timation, motivated primarily by latency reduction [see 106, for a review]. As discussed above, the primary heuristic that is used to decide whether or not a candidate identified by a GW detection pipeline is a ‘real’ GW signal or not is the false alarm rate (FAR). Calculation of the FAR is based on the ranking of ‘foreground triggers’ against a noise background and contains little to no information about the known or expected population of astrophysi-cal gravitational wave sources. There is implicit infor-mation in the sense that modelled searches are based on a template-bank that has been chosen based on some expectation about the population, however this does not explicitly propagate to the hypothesis being tested in the formation of the detection statistic. A threshold FAR of FAR < 1 × 10 −8 s was chosen to filter candidates that were of su ffi cient significance to trigger futher investi-gation and dissemination of the GW alert to the public [107]. In O4 candidates with 1 × 10 −4 s−1 < FAR <

> 3Although the Advanced Virgo interferometer joined joint opera-tions only midway through O2, with KAGRA joining intermittently during O3 and O4.

1 × 10 −8 s−1 were reported as subthreshold candidates, with information about these candidates also released publically [8]. The FAR only quantifies the rate at which one would expect to see a similar trigger arise from noise processes within the detector, and it does not give any estimation of how likely it is that the trigger is of astrophysical ori-gin. The latter is of great interest to the multimessenger astronomy community. To determine the probability of astrophysical origin , pastro , requires knowledge of the source population as well as the sensitivity of search al-gorithms. pastro accounts for the true positive rate, and is more consistent when working with catalogs containing events that have been detected with di ff erent selection functions [108]. The formal mathematical definition of 

pastro is [72] 

pastro (r) = Ra f (r)

Ra f (r) + Rnb(x) (28) where Ra (Rn) is the total rate of signal (noise) candi-dates identified by a pipeline, and f (r) ( b(r)) are the probability density function of the signal (noise) events at ranking statistic r. There are di ff erences in how pastro 

is calculated by each pipeline: f (r) is based on an as-trophysical source model that di ff ers slightly between pipelines [see 72, for details], and each pipeline uses its own search statistics to estimate the rates Rx that depend on the method used to calculate the FAR of candidates. However, despite methodological di ff erences, pastro val-ues are broadly consistent across pipelines [109]. pastro 

was also one of the metrics released through open pub-lic alerts since the beginning of the third LVK observ-ing run, and in LVK public alerts is broken down into 

pastro = pBBH + pNSBH + pBNS . These classes are based on a somewhat arbitrary mass cut-o ff to delineate NS and BH ( MBH |NS = 3 M ⊙), and pastro contains no informa-tion about the EOS [109, 110]. The reciprocal of pastro 

is pterr , i.e. the probability that the trigger resulted from non-stationary noise in the detector as a result of terres-trial activity. High pterr , together with clear evidence of terrestrial noise, occasionally results in the retraction of GW candidate alerts. Over time, additional heuristics have been introduced (all calculated on the assumption of an event being of astrophysical origin) to inform electromagnetic follow-up of GW events. These metrics include: 

• EM-Bright : CBCs containing at least one neutron star have the potential to produce electromagnetic emission through the tidal disruption and heat-ing of neutron-rich material [16]. Such a signal is dependent on the masses and equation-of-state 10 of the compact objects that merge. EM-bright 

[111] provides machine-learning tools to compute three scores that can be used to gauge the likeli-hood a given gravitational wave event: contains at least one neutron star ( HasNS ), leaves behind tidally-disrupted matter outside the remnant com-pact object ( HasRemnant , which is most pertinant to NSBH systems), and produces a remnant com-pact object in the lower mass gap ( HasMassGap ). 

EM-bright marginalises over equation-of-state, and mitigates JM the potential systematic and ran-dom errors that can arise from triggers produced by template based searches. During O4, an ad-ditional category was introduced to account for the introduction of sub-solar mass (SSM) searches (HasSSM )4.

• Binned source chirp masses : Toward the end of O4, the LVK began to release binned source-frame chirp mass estimates for both modelled search pipelines (which produce a coarse maximum like-lihood estimate of the detector-frame chirp mass and the source redshift through the matched filter-ing process) and for the weakly-modelled cWB-BBH search. Information is released in the form of the probability that the source-frame chirp mass belongs to a coarse mass bin [110]. 

3.5. Public data releases 

GW detector data can be obtained from the Gravita-tional Wave Open Science Center [GWOSC, 112], mak-ing it possible for searches for gravitational wave tran-sients to be done by scientists external to the LVK col-laboration. For example, [113] identify a binary black hole merger not identified in GWTC-1 [114]. Their search improves on the sensitivty of the LVK searches by accounting for non-Gaussian fluctuations in the de-tector noise. The Open Gravitational Wave Catalogs [OGC, 115, 116, 117, 118] also analyse data from LVK observing runs. Although 1-OGC [115] does not iden-tify any additional candidates beyond those reported in GWTC-1, 2-OGC [116] identifies GW151205, a BBH merger with a primary mass of 67 +28  

> −17

M⊙. The OGC search uses the PyCBC matched filter gravita-tional wave detection pipeline framework, but incorpo-rates a di ff erent algorithm to select graivtational wave signal candidates by imposing phase, amplitude and time delay consistency [115]. The significance of the candidates is calculated using an improved background   

> 4Currently, no pastro is calculated for SSM searches, [110]

model, and a larger search parameter space of signal templates. These searches are important: they validate the methods used to construct GWTC-1 and demon-strate that the results are robust to di ff erences in detec-tion methods. They also show the power of the wider as-tronomy community being able to access the complete LVK data sets that are used to produce the GWTC and the value of open data. 

3.6. Gravitational wave discovery in action: GW150914 

On September 14, 2015 the two detectors of LIGO simultaneously observed their first gravitational wave transient: GW150914 [6]. The event was initially iden-tified by the cWB pipeline [81], an unmodelled search for generic gravitational wave transients, which issued an alert within three minutes. Within a few hours, ad-ditional searches for generic gravitational wave tran-sients, omicron-LALinference-Bursts (oLIB, [119]) and BayesWave [82], confirmed the presence of a signal. A matched-filter search of the GW data obtained be-tween September 12 and October 20 2015 was sub-sequently carried out using the PyCBC-Live and Gst-LAL searches. Both of these pipelines require stable instrument operation over periods longer than ∼ 1 week to generate reliable estimates of event significance [6]. Given that GW150914 was detected just two days af-ter the detectors were switched on, it is therefore not surprising that these pipelines did not detect the event in low-latency. GW150914 was identified with the same matched-filter template in both analyses, with component masses 47 .9 M ⊙ and 36 .6M⊙ at a combined matched-filter SNR ρc = 24. The two search algorithms perform ranking of GW candidate triggers di ff erently, however both resolve consistent false alarm probabili-ties: from PyCBC, only a upper limit on the FAP can be derived, as FAP < 2 × 10 −7 over 384 hours of obser-vation, whereas from GstLAL, the FAP = 1.4 × 10 −11 

[6]. 

3.6.1. What did GW150914 tell us about astrophysics 

From an astrophysical perspective, the detection of GW150914 revealed that not only can black holes with masses 25 M⊙ form in binary systems in nature, they can merge within a Hubble time [120]. The results of full parameter estimation using LALinference for the first GW event detected using laser interferometers revealed a binary of chirp mass M = 28 +2 

> −2

M⊙, comprising com-ponents m1 = 36 +5 

> −4

M⊙ and m2 = 29 +4 

> −4

M⊙ [120] 5. The 

> 5The discrepancy between the masses determined by the detection pipelines and parameter estimation is explained in Sections 3.1 and

11 system was revealed to have an e ff ective spin consis-tent with χeff ∼ 0. The formation of black holes with masses consistent with the components of GW150914 through binary stellar evolution requires weak massive-star winds, which are expected to arise only in systems with comparatively low metallicities [ Z/Z⊙] ≤ 0.5 [e.g. 121, 122]. On the other hand, the observed masses can also be explained through dynamical interactions lead-ing to the formation of the BBH system that merged to produce GW150914 [123]. 

4. Statistical properties of GW source populations as a messenger 

Fundamental questions about the astrophysics of compact objects can only be answered by considering the statistical properties of the overall CO population. These questions include whether there is a limit on the maximum mass of a black hole that forms through stel-lar collapse, and what the overall structure of the black hole and neutron star mass distributions tell us about star formation, stellar evolution across cosmic time. We can also probe their formation mechanisms and evolution-ary history. Each proposed channel for forming a com-pact binary — isolated binary stellar evolution, dynam-ical assembly in globular or nuclear star clusters, evolu-tion through active galactic nuclei discs, or hierarchical triple systems — makes testable predictions about the resulting distributions of masses, spins, mass ratios, and merger rates [see 124, and references therein, for ex-ample]. By constructing flexible and physics-informed statistical models for these distributions and fitting them to the ensemble of detected events using hierarchical Bayesian inference, it is now possible to confront these predictions with data. 

4.1. From single-event to population inference 

Beyond single-event inference, which provides in-sight into the properties of individual events, it is also important to determine the properties of the GW source population based on catalogs of (sometimes uncertain) observations. The hierarchical Bayesian inference for-malism used to do this is able to consistently account for measurement uncertainty and selection e ff ects to in-fer ‘population hyperparameters’ that describes a model from which individual event parameters are drawn. The population likelihood used in GW population inference is the joint likelihood of the dataset d comprised of di

> 3.3

observations given a population model M(Λ) that is de-scribed by the population hyperparameters 6 Λ,

L(d| Λ, M) =

> N

Y

> i=1

1

ξ(Λ)

Z

L(di| θi)π(θi|Λ)dθi (29) The likelihood is marginalized over the parameters of each individual observation θi, and π(θi|Λ) is a condi-tional prior that defines the population model M. This is equivalent to the population likelihood after marginal-izing over the scale of the Poisson process that describes the GW event detection rate given a specific choice of prior (for example, see the derivation of [125], which gives a bottom-up construction of the population likeli-hood). The relationship between the population likeli-hood and the individual event likelhood can be visual-ized as a directed acyclic graph (Fig. 6) that shows how the individual event likelhood components, namely the waveform model for the i-th event hModel  

> i

and its param-eters θi are drawn from the population hyperparameters 

Λ. The likelihood in Eq. 26 represents the process that generates the data observed by each of the N detectors in the inner panel. The ξ(Λ) normalization factor is used to account for the observational selection function associated with GW searches [71]. Our observed population of CBCs is the result of a censored process, where only some subset of the population meet the criteria for detection. The selection function responsible for this can be written 

ξ(Λ) =

Z

Pdet (θ)π(θ|Λ, M)dθ. (30) Determination of Pdet is non-trivial and is generally evaluated through large scale ‘injection campaigns’ where known signals drawn from a reference population are injected into detector noise, and search pipelines in-vestigate the rate at which they can recover these sig-nals at a given significance threshold [e.g. 127, 128, 129, 126]. This allows us to quantify the relative fraction of events in our astrophysical population we would expect to ’miss’ given standard search strategies as a function of the GW signal parameters. The introduction of the population likelihood allows us to access an additional ‘messenger’ – the population hyperparameters Λ – from which we can draw astrophysical conclusions. 

4.2. Binary black hole population 

Early attempts to resolve structure in the BBH mass distribution rely on comparatively simple models that  

> 6Not to be confused with the Cosmological Constant, which is also denoted Λ, but serves as short-hand for a negative-pressure equation of state rather than an inferrable parameter

12 N detectors    

> ievents
> Λ
> θiti
> hModel
> i
> F+/×
> N
> hobs
> N,i
> nN
> dN,i Figure 6: Directed acyclic graph showing the hierarchical strucutre of the GW population inference problem and the interdependence of the components of the population likelihood Eq. 29. Based on Fig 1 of [126]

are not over-specified, given the small size of the CBC population detected during O1 and O2. For example, in [130] the only free parameter for the population model is the spectral index of the power-law distribution of the primary mass m1,

p(m1) ∝ m−α 

> 1

, (31) which was inferred to be α = 2.5+1.5 

> −1.6

from five BBH events. This is consistent with a flat distribution of 

m1. Simple models allow for easy interpretation of the e ff ects of model misspecification: the flat distri-bution is driven by a high, fixed upper limit on the maximum black hole mass. This was broadly consis-tent with expectations from di ff erent population synthe-sis simulations [131] as well as dynamical simulations, and allowed early constraints to be placed on the typ-ical metallicity of the environments in which the five BBH merger systems must have formed. The shape of the mass distribution was more tightly constrained as the modelling increased in complexity and more data became available with [114], where population mod-els incorporate parameterisations of the mass distribu-tion, spin distribution, and merger rate, whose popula-tion parameters (hyperparameters) are inferred jointly from the data [e.g. following formalism developed in 132, 133, 134]. It became clear that the primary mass distribution is not flat, and in fact falls quite steeply with α ∼ 1.5. The first hints of structure surfaced, with marginal evidence for a peak in the mass distri-bution around m1 ∼ 10 M ⊙. Conclusive observational evidence for this peak was first found based on GWTC-2 [135, 136] and subsequently incorporated into the weakly modelled LVK population analysis in GWTC-3[137]. CCSNe mechanisms associated with the for-mation of BHs with masses ∼ 10 M ⊙ are relatively well understood [138] and this feature is predicted in isolated binary evolution modelling [e.g. 139, 140] Evidence for structure in the mass distribution is not limited to this very prominent peak in the merger rate densities around 10 M ⊙. There is also now evidence that the power-law distribution of m1 is not consistent with a single power-law, and there is instead a break around 30 M ⊙ [18]. Interpretations of this feature are scant, but could point at either a dynamically form-ing sub-population or a mass-dependent e ffi ciency in the rate at which binary black holes form through bi-nary stellar evolution (e.g. variations in the e ffi ciency of secular processes such as common envelope phases, mass loss, or mass reversals [141]). Structure around 

m1 ∼ 35 M ⊙ has been present in each population model since GWTC-2 [e.g. Model C of 142] however was not identified at the time at high credibility. Interest-ingly, this feature is well evidenced in the GWTC-4 analysis [18] across both strongly and weakly modelled approaches to fitting the overall population, not just a pathology of the approach taken in [142]. This popu-lation of BBH mergers with masses ∼ 35 M ⊙ preferen-tially merge with more equal mass partners [143, 18]. Peaks in the BBH mass distribution from dynamical simulations of dense stellar cluster are expected to oc-cur at masses > 10 M ⊙ [144, 145], and may contribute to these observed sub-populations. With the advent of weakly-modelled approaches to population modelling (such as [146, 147, 148], as se-lected examples), it is tempting to assume that any fea-ture in the mass distribution can be interpreted as an ad-ditional feature or evidence for further sub-populations. However, the apparent absence of one key feature that is predicted by the majority of stellar endpoint modelling is particularly notable. The pair-instability mass gap [149] is likely not empty – both GW190521 [150] and GW231123 [151] have components that have masses in-consistent with having formed through stellar collapse – tells us that we do not fully understand the mecha-nisms of CCSNe or we are finding hierarchical mergers. Coupled with the evidence from BH spin distributions, there is good evidence that at least some of these are 13 forming hierarchically, although a primordial origin of GW231123 has been posited [152], and the presence of a mass cut-o ff is somewhat sensitive to modelling and prior assumptions [153, 154]. Looking beyond the dis-tribution of primary masses, there is now some emerg-ing evidence that there could be an upper mass-gap in the m2 distribution [155]. The mass ratio distribution of the population also en-codes important astrophysical information as it can hint at formation mechanisms. The first approaches to ex-plicitly modelling the mass-ratio distribution along with the primary mass distribution found that the mass ra-tio distribution tends to favour comparable mass bina-ries, although detection of events such as GW190814 and GW190412 in [142] indicate that BBH with mass ratios that are substantially non-equal do exist in nature at a non-negligible rate. Now, analysing a population of around 200 events, it is clear that there the aforemen-tioned peak in the distribution around m1 ∼ 10 M ⊙ is a statistically significant feature, and there is a fairly well-established correlation between this peak and mass-ratio 

q, suggesting a sub-population that preferentially pairs up with smaller black holes where q ∼ 0.7 [156, 157]. The spin distribution gives us valuable evidence about the origin of BBH systems, potentially allowing us to distinguish sub-populations arising from isolated binary evolution, and dynamical formation in a vari-ety of di ff erent environments. Early constraints on the spin magnitude χ and χeff distributions suggested that BHs tend to be born with low spins or some other pro-cess causes the spin vector orientation to tilt in such a way that χeff becomes small [140]. However, when the spin magnitudes are small enough, simple models such as those used in early analysis of BBH spins tend pro-duce features that cannot be distinguished within obser-vational uncertainties [142]. In [137] there was a strik-ing claim: 12-44% of BBH have χeff < 0, implying at least one black hole tilt angle is > 90 deg (retrograde spins). The same analysis finds evidence for an overden-sity of BBHs with χ < 0.01. The latter subpopulation of binaries with negligible spin and no evidence for sig-nificantly misaligned spin would be consistent with the field formation scenario [158, 159], while the former, with misaligned spins with large tilt angles could most plausibly form through dynamical interactions [160]. There is ongoing debate about the existence of this overdensity at small values of χ: on one hand, works find that current data does not require the inclusion of a low-spin subpopulation in the spin distribution model [161, 162] or find that only a small fraction of events posses low spins [163]. Others find evidence that is supportive of two distinct sub-populations in the spin distribution[164, 165], including a low-spin sub-population [166, 167]. Analysis of the GWTC-4 pop-ulation confirms a dearth of BBH with large spins, with 90% of events having χ < 0.57. Both models produce broadly consistent results: a peak in p(χ) at 

χ ∼ 0.01 − 0.23 under the assumption that the spins are independently and identically distributed[18]. There is also evidence that at least one black hole per binary has χ ≥ 0 [18]. This finding is particularly in-teresting in the context of astrophysics as it suggests that at least one BH per binary is spun up by some process in its evolution, for example through tidal in-teractions, or through accretion [140]. Low numbers of detected BBH with large spin magnitudes suggest that although there is a non-negligible contribution from hi-erarchical mergers, the population cannot be dominated by second-generation BHs [168, 169]. The χeff distribution in GWTC-4 is found to be skewed and asymmetric with more support for positive values [18]. This observation is consistent with a domi-nant sub-population arising from isolated binary evolu-tion where spin-orbit alignment is retained throughout the evolution of the binary. There is, however, a non-negligible number of binaries with negative χeff (frac-tion of 0 .24 − 0.42 depending on the spin model used). This is used to bound the fraction of BBHs that form dynamically in gas-free environments (as gas-rich en-vironments are thought to contribute toward spin align-ment) under the assumption that the spins are isotrop-ically distributed. This has allowed constraints on the fraction of BBH that form dynamically: less than 84%. Of the BBH population that form dynamically, hierar-chical mergers are also expected to have negative χeff ,and is calculated to be ≤ 3% in the analysis of [18] fol-lowing [170, 171], although this value is highly model dependent. With the observation of more BBH, mea-surements of the χeff distribution will become more in-formative, however there is increasingly compelling ev-idence that the skewness of the distribution arises from an astrophysical process rather than model misspecifi-cation [172]. This, coupled with the information about the spin magnitudes discussed above, suggests that the majority of the observed population cannot be forming through dynamical mergers, and hierarchical mergers contribute a small (but still non-zero) fraction of the observed pop-ulation [18]. Insights into the origins and evolution of BBH can be gleaned from the overall BBH merger rate, and its evolution across cosmic time. More recent theoretical estimates of the BBH merger rate from stellar evolu-tion simulations are summarised in [173]. A compari-14 son of the merger rates predicted by [131] and the ob-served merger rate over the course of the initial and advanced detector observations is shown in Figure 7. Beyond the overall present day merger rate, the delay-time distribution (DDT) is the time between the forma-tion of a star and it’s demise as a binary black hole merger and is highly dependent on the processes that shape isolated binary evolution, or the timescales on which dynamical formation of BBH can occur. The delay times of BBH in dynamically formed and iso-lated binaries can vary from Myr to more than a Hub-ble time [174, 175, 176] depending on phenomena such as common envelope phases, stable mass transfer, and mass-ratio reversal [47, 144, 177]. It is now possible to observationally infer some information about the BBH delay-time distribution [178] indirectly through either studying the rate evolution of BBH mergers as a func-tion of redshift. Observations of the redshift evolution of the BBH population are challenging to confront with theoretical predictions, due to a relative dearth of data at higher redshifts due to the limited horizon of cur-rent generation BBH detectors. Theoretical predictions may also overestimate BBH formation rates relative to detailed stellar evolution models [179], indicating that deeper understanding of binary stellar evolution may be required to fully resolve the DTD. Nevertheless, obser-vations currently disfavour very long BBH delay times, suggesting that common envelope phases are extremely important in shaping the observed BBH population that forms in isolated binaries. The influence of dynamical interactions on the delay time distribution is still rel-atively under-explored, especially in gas-rich environ-ments [180]. 

4.3. NS and NSBH populations 

Unlike binary black holes, the existence of neutron star binaries – and the emission of gravitational waves by neutron star binaries – was well established by the time of the first direct detection of gravitational waves in 2015. The population of galactic double neutron stars (albeit small) set the expectations for BNS gravitational wave sources, with extrapolations of the BNS merger rate from the galactic DNS population and population synthesis suggesting merger rates of between 0.4 - 400 per year (90% CI) [131, and references therein] (Fig 8). By the beginning of the second LVK observing run in 2017, it seemed that a detection of a binary neutron star merger was only a matter of time. Until 2017, everything we knew about the mass dis-tribution of BNS systems came from electromagnetic observations of both isolated and binary Galactic pul-sars. Analysis of the Galactic pulsar population shows 

> Figure 7: Observed GW BBH rates from [131, 181, 6, 15, 114, 142, 137, 18]

a double-peaked mass distribution [183, 184, 185, 186]. The secondary peak lies close to M ∼ 1.7 M ⊙. Only isolated pulsars are found in this higher mass com-ponent: the Galactic double neutron star population appears to consist exclusively consist of sources with masses m1,2 ∼ 1.35 M ⊙. There are theoretical con-straints that bound the range of permissible neutron star masses: causality limits the maximum mass of a stable neutron star to < 3 M ⊙ [187] while a lower bound of 1 M ⊙ is imposed by the dynamics of plausible core col-lapse supernova mechanisms [e.g. 188, and references therein]. Indeed, there are no galactic neutron stars that have been identified outside this mass range. A more stringent limit on the maximum neutron star mass is the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volko ff maximum mass for a non-rotating neutron star [189, 190]. The precise value of MTOV is strongly dependent on the (currently unknown) equation-of-state (EoS) but expected to be around MTOV ∼ 2.0 − 2.2M⊙ based on observations of galactic neutron stars [191]. The most massive pulsars detected in the Galactic population are thought to have masses that lie close to the TOV mass, allowing the ex-clusion of some extreme EoS [186]. Gravitational waves o ff er a new avenue to explore the neutron star mass distribution. The first BNS merger GW170817 revealed that this extra-galactic DNS sys-tem had properties broadly consistent with the known Galactic DNS population [192]. However, the discovery of GW190425 [43] revealed that merging BNS systems that contain far more massive NS do exist in nature, and that the merging DNS population may di ff er from the 15 Figure 8: Observed GW BNS rates from [131, 181, 182, 15, 114, 43, 142, 137, 18] 

DNS population in our galaxy. Electromagnetic observations have not yet detected binary systems consisting of black holes and neutron stars. Identifying such a system, for example com-prised of a stellar mass BH and a pulsar is a key objec-tive for radio astronomy experiments, and such systems have been conjectured to exist for based on simulations [193] and observations of high-mass x-ray binary sys-tems [194]. Through O1 and O2, it was only possible to place an upper limit on the rate of NSBH mergers of R ≤ 610 Gpc −3 yr −1 [114]. This upper limit is, nev-ertheless, weakly constraining of predictions from bi-nary population synthesis estimates which are highly sensitive to the complex processes that occur during the evolution of massive binary stars and range from 0.1 − 800 Gpc −1 yr −1 [131]. Our first indication that NSBH systems do exist in nature came toward the end of the Third LVK observing run [107]. Two NSBH events were detected in quick succession: GW200105 (9 + 1.9 M ⊙) and GW200115 (6 + 1.5 M ⊙) [195]. Although GW200105 was later found to not pass the pastro threshold for inclusion in GWTC-3 [107], it has remained a candidate of inter-est. GWTC-4 [18] confirmed only one NS-containing system with FAR < 0.25 yr for inclusion in their pop-ulation analysis, namely GW230529 [196] (although a second was identified in the engineering run preceeding O4a, GW230528, which is excluded from the popula-tion analysis as its detection involved substantial human intervention). In spite of the small number of NS-contaning CBCs 

> Figure 9: Observed GW NSBH rates, from [131, 182, 114, 195, 137, 18]

that have been detected, the mass distribution of neu-tron stars can still be inferred. GWTC-3 found that the inferred NS mass distribution was relatively flat [137], with a sharp decrease in the merger rate at m ∼ 2.5 M ⊙.In GWTC-4, one additional NS (the secondary compo-nent of GW230529) is added to the population [18] 7.Two di ff erent models are used to fit the NS mass distri-bution: one in which masses are assumed to be Gaus-sian distributed, and another in which they are assumed to follow a power law. Analysis shows that neutron stars detected through GW emission follow a mass distribu-tion with a power-law slope constrained to α = 7.7, or in the case of the Gaussian model shows largely un-constrained peak width σ = 0.68 + 1.2 and location 

μ = 1.4 + 0.48. Although these results are highly uncer-tain due to the small population size, there is evidence for a peak in the mass distribution that is consistent with the Galactic DNS mass distribution peak around 1 .3 M⊙,however the distribution of NS masses in GW-emitting systems is much broader. As discussed above, LVK analyses make stringent cuts on the FAR and pastro of events that are incorpo-rated into population analyses. This ensures a high level of purity (low risk of incorporating noise transients) and data that is of su ffi cient quality to extract significant amounts of information. In the context of the NS mass distribution, this also involves excluding events where there is ambiguity about whether a CBC component is         

> 7There are more potential NS in GWTC-4, however only GW230529 passes the threshold to be included in the high-purity pop-ulation analysis.

16 a BH or NS. This results in the exclusion some events that have been interpreted as containing NS, such as GW190814. This event has been variously classified as a BBH or NSBH merger [137, 197]. The inclusion of the secondary component of GW190814 [198] tends to flatten the NS mass distribution and extend it beyond 2.5 M ⊙ [197], potentially providing evidence that the GW BNS population di ff ers from the Galactic popu-lation [199]. The more parsimonious interpretation is, however, that GW190814 is a BBH merger [200] GW190814 and events like it present a classification problem. Prior to the detection of gravitational waves, electromagnetic observations have suggested there is a dearth of compact objects with masses between 3 −

5 M ⊙, a region occasionally referred to as the ‘lower mass gap’. The processes that are thought to occur dur-ing the core-collapse of massive stars, such as neutrino heating, can be invoked to explain the presence of this apparent separation between the black hole and neutron star mass distributions. However, we are now detecting more and more objects - in both EM and GW obser-vations - that suggest the lower mass gap may not be empty at all. For example, the primary component of the merging system that produced GW230529[196] has posterior support for m1 inside the lower mass gap. The interpretation of this events as BNS or NSBH is uncer-tain and depends on the assumed mass and spin priors. A clear detection of tidal deformability induced phasing of the gravitational waveform could be considered evi-dence for the presence of at least one neutron star com-ponent, however this requires signals with high SNR. Gravitational wave detection treats classification of events as BNS, NSBH or BBH as a comparatively sim-ple problem based on arbitrary definitions of allowed component masses of various systems (see discussion of 

pastro above). In GWTC-3 [137], NS and BH categories were distinguished using prior information on the max-imum neutron star mass based on constraints on MTOV 

that constrain the maximum non-rotating neutron star mass MT OV < 2.5. [137] A similar method was used in the analysis of GWTC-4 [142], which explicitly ex-cluded GW190814 from the NS mass distribution anal-ysis based on its ambiguous classification. More rig-orous statistical methods of handling this classification problem such as [200] have been proposed, but a sim-plistic sub-division of the population based on heuristic arguments about the TOV mass has been preferred. 

4.4. Cosmology as population-level inference 

Because each gravitational wave signal detected car-ries with it some information about the location of its source in the cosmos, we can use compact binary merg-ers as ‘standard sirens’ [17] to study the expansion his-tory and energy density content of the Universe. The standard “ ΛCDM” model of cosmology describes a Universe that is spatially flat, dominated by cold Dark Matter (CDM) to enable formation of gravitationally bound structures like galaxies at early times, and a neg-ative pressure term that drives the acceleration of expan-sion in later epochs, a ‘cosmological constant’ Λ. When studying the late-time expansion of the Universe driven by Λ, attributed to an unknown force called ‘dark en-ergy’ [201, 202], the parameter we are most interested in constraining is the expansion rate of the Universe in the present epoch: the Hubble constant H0. GW cosmology with standard sirens can be viewed as a population in-ference problem: the parameters that describe the cos-mological model become population hyperparameters: specifically, information about the luminosity distance-redshift relation predicted by the ΛCDM cosmological model is embedded in the the redshift distribution of GW mergers that can be measured indirectly, while the luminosity distance distribution can be inferred directly from the GW signals themselves. GWs have the potential to resolve one of our major outstanding mysteries about the ΛCDM cosmological model. Our current precision measurements of H0 are in a statistical ‘tension’ of around 4 σ: on one hand, measurements that extrapolate the present day expan-sion rate from fitting the temperature fluctuations of the CMB with a model that derives from the standard 

ΛCDM cosmological model derive a value of H0 =

67 .8 ± 0.9 km s −1 Mpc −1 [203]. Supernovae, specifi-cally the standardizable candle thermonuclear Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), can be used as part of the cos-mic distance ladder to derive a much higher value, 

H0 = 73 .0 ± 1.4 km s −1 Mpc −1 [204]. It remains an open question as to whether this tension arises from some un-accounted for systematic error associated with the cos-mic distance ladder or intrinsic to SNe Ia themselves, or whether our standard cosmological model – ΛCDM – is incomplete. GWs o ff er an independent probe of H0

that can potentially be used to resolve this tension, as they do not require any tethering to the cosmic distance ladder. GW cosmology methods are split into categories that are delineated by the mechanism by which one deter-mines the redshift of the gravitational wave source: 

• Bright sirens have identifiable electromagnetic counterparts that can be associated with individ-ual host galaxies from which a confident and pre-cise redshift estimate can be obtained. We have 17 only one unambiguous coincidence between a GW event and an EM transient that allows for host galaxy identification, GW170817. 

• The dark siren technique determines a much broader redshift distribution by assigning associ-ation probabilities between a GW event and each catalogued galaxy within the localization region from which it has originated. There are numerous systematic e ff ects that must be considered in the dark siren method, ranging from the methodology to rank galaxies that are most likely to have hosted a GW event [205], to catalog incompleteness [e.g. 206], to peculiar velocity e ff ects [207]. 

• The spectral siren technique 8, which uses only gravitational wave data to obtain an estimate of H0

by using information about the overall rest frame mass distribution of CO mergers. Here, the red-shift information is implicitly contained in the o ff -set between the rest and source frame masses, as the masses observed at the GW detector are ef-fectively redshifted by a factor Ms = (1 + z)Mr.There are several sub-categories of spectral siren techniques, however all are based on using gravi-tational wave data alone to determine H0.

• The Love siren technique and its variations use in-formation about the equation of state of neutron stars, obtained through information encoded in the GW waveform through phasing terms introduced by tidal deformability to evaluate the redshift of the source, again through relating the rest and source frame masses using the redshift relation above. Love siren analyses cannot be performed at current detector sensitivites, as they require a large popula-tion of BNS mergers and confident measurements of tidal deformability. A an overview of these techniques can be found in [208]. The present best constraints on H0 from GW standard siren analyses use GW170817 as a bright siren, giving 

H0 = 70 +12  

> −8

km s −1 Mpc −1 (Fig 10, [209]). The uncer-tainty is dominated by there being only one observation from which a measurement can be made, and the degen-eracy between the inclination angle of the binary and the luminosity distance distribution. This uncertainty can be e ff ectively reducing by using late-time radio obser-vations the radio jet produced by GW170817 to better    

> 8The ‘spectrum’ in question when referring to the spectral siren technique is the ‘mass spectrum’, i.e. the mass distribution
> Figure 10: Bright Siren measurement of H0from [209] (black his-togram) compared to SNe Ia constraint (green, [204]) and CMB con-straint (purple, [214]). Posterior PDF obtained from https://dcc. ligo.org/LIGO-P1700296/public

constrain dL [210] giving H0 = 86 .3+4.4 

> −4.3

km s −1 Mpc −1,as the main source of uncertainty in the measurement arises from the degeneracy between dL and ι. Other analyses also fold in systematic e ff ects like the peculiar velocity of NGC4993 [211]. In GWTC-4, H0 is esti-mated by combining the posterior distributions on H0

from the GW170817 bright siren with a dark siren anal-ysis to give H0 = 76 .6+13 .0 

> −9.5

km s −1 Mpc −1 (median and 68.3% CI, [212]). A comprehensive overview of state-of-the-art standard siren measurements of H0 using the techniques described above can be found in [213]. 

5. Individual GW events beyond vanilla waveforms 

As we saw in Section 2, GW events carry information about the physical properties of the merging COs. As our GW detectors increase in sensitivity, we are increas-ingly able to measure properties of CBCs beyond first-order e ff ects. Studying these so-called ‘non-vanilla’ events, where waveforms carry with them the imprints of spin precession, orbital eccentricity or higher order modes, we can learn more about the genealogy of CBCs across the Universe. One of the big questions that has emerged as our grav-itational wave catalogs have grown is ‘do we only detect circularised, non-precessing binary systems?’ Identify-ing and measuring the eccentricity of merging COs 9, or 

> 9BNS systems are generally expected to circularise and align their

18 identifying evidence of spin precession, would allow us to obtain a more rigorous insight into their evolution-ary history. This is because these e ff ects are expected to arise almost exclusively from systems that form dynam-ically [144, 215]. A measurement of either eccentricity or precessing spin complements constraints on the indi-vidual object spins, and the e ff ective spin of the binary system, building a detailed picture of the likely forma-tion scenario that gives rise to a GW event. Understanding these e ff ects requires two things: Ro-bust and e ffi cient to compute waveform models that in-corporate precessing spin, eccentricity or higher-order modes, and an abundance of GW data that can be con-fronted with these models. 

5.1. Spin precession 

The development of computationally-e ffi cient wave-form models that incorporate the e ff ects of spin preces-sion has allowed detailed studies of precessing spins in the handful of individual events where there is ev-idence for misaligned spins (the strongest candidates being GW190412 [216, 217], GW191109_010717 and GW200129_065458 [107]). However, contamination from transient glitches in detector data [218, 219] and waveform systematics make conclusively detecting spin precession challenging. The most convincing evidence that we have detected a GW event with significantly precessing spins is GW200129. This event coincided with substantial excess noise in the Livingston inter-ferometer. However, numerous works have contin-ued to identify relatively strong evidence for precession [218, 220, 221, 118]. However, there is some sugges-tion that waveform systematics must be carefully con-sidered when measuring spin precession: for example, [107] found evidence for precession when using the IM-RPhenomXPHM approximant, but not with the SEOB-NRv4 waveform model. Although tests for model mis-specification have been suggested for GW astrophysics [222, 223], results such as those above must be inter-preted with appropriate caution. 

5.2. Eccentricity 

There is moderate evidence for the detection of ec-centric mergers (Table 1). The degeneracy between the eff ects of spin precession and eccentricity on the ob-served waveform makes inferring the existence of both eccentricity and spin precession simultaneously not pos-sible at current detector sensitivities [230]. This is ex-acerbated in higher mass CBCs: although in principle 

> spins as forming a BNS system that mergers in a Hubble time through dynamical capture is vanishingly rare

the enhanced signal amplitude relative to the noise floor compared to signals from lower mass systems should al-low for information about higher-order contributions to the waveform amplitude and phase evolution to be ex-tracted, there are fewer cycles present in the LIGO band that can be used to search for the phasing and ampli-tude modulating e ff ects of these phenomena. For exam-ple, in events like GW190521, novel techniques must be used to disentangle these e ff ects [231]. However, other works have claimed that it is not possible to distinguish whether this event is a circularised, spin-precessing sys-tem or an eccentric merger [224] due to so few GW cy-cles being present in the LIGO band. 

5.3. Higher order multipole emission 

Beyond these additional physical parameters that de-scribe the compact binary system, another higher-order contribution to the frequency and amplitude evolution of the GW signal is the presence of higher-order modes. As noted earlier, the (2,2) quadrupolar mode dominates the detected GW signal in current GW detectors, how-ever if CBCs are su ffi ciently asymmetric in mass ratio, higher order modes make substantial contributions to the observed waveform. The GW events GW170729 [232], GW190412 [216] and GW190814 [198] - all of which show evidence for higher order modes. As GW detectors become more sensitive, the inclusion of higher order modes in analyses is now commonplace [233] and neglecting to include multipole emission can have non-negligible impacts on analyses [234]. Mergers with very asymmetric masses are expected to have higher or-der multipoles that are more readily measured, which is why the most asymmetric CBC systems GW190412 (q ∼ 0.28) and GW190814 ( q ∼ 0.112) exhibit the most conclusive evidence of higher order modes. How-ever, the model misspecification problem also presents a particular challenge in disentangling the qualitatively similar e ff ects of eccentricity and higher order modes on CBC waveforms as observed by LIGO. For exam-ple, there is disagreement in the literature as to whether GW190521 exhibits evidence of eccentricity or preces-sion, as discussed above, or whether the signal can be better explained by one that has a measurable subdomi-nant multipole component [217]. 

5.4. Methodological challenges 

Many searches for these phenomena focus on detailed study of events already identified by GW searches. These searches are designed to detect signals that arise 19 Table 1: Binary black hole events with reported evidence for non-zero orbital eccentricity. Eccentricities are quoted at a gravitational-wave reference frequency of 10 Hz ( e10 ) unless otherwise noted. Quoted uncertainties correspond to 90% credible intervals. 

Event Measured eccentricity Reference GW190521 e10 ≥ 0.1 [224] GW190521 e = 0.69 +0.17  

> −0.22

[225] GW190620 e10 ≥ 0.05 [226] GW191109 ≥ 70% posterior support at e10 ≥ 0.05 [227] GW190701 e10 = 0.35 +0.32  

> −0.11

[228] GW200129 e10 = 0.27 +0.10  

> −0.12

to 0 .17 +0.14  

> −0.13

[228] GW200208_222617 e10 = 0.35 +0.18  

> −0.21

[228] GW190929 Residual support for non-zero e10 [229] from circularlised CO binaries. 10 However, detection relies on there being a substantial overlap (usually ≥

90% between the template and observed waveform). If the e ff ects of these higher order e ff ects are substantial enough to degrade this overlap, signals that arise from these systems will be missed in standard matched fil-ter searches. Searches that can detect signals from ec-centric or precessing systems can be performed using minimally modelled techniques that are more sensitive to signals exhibiting these e ff ects [e.g. 235], or using templates that are sensitive to eccentricity [236, 237] or precession [238]. These searches will become more im-portant as increased detector sensitivies amplify the po-tential template mismatch with eccentric and precessing signals. Recent work has shown that incorporating the eff ects of spin precession in NSBH searches can more tightly constrain the merger rate in the local universe [239], showing that if there is no preferred direction for component spin, the overall NSBH merger rate is 

∼ 16% smaller than that reported in [137]. 

6. Coincident multimessenger observations 

The earliest GW detections prompted feverish searches for electromagnetic counterparts from as-tronomers not content to extract information from grav-itational wave data alone. Such searches were well-motivated, with a well-established theoretical connec-tion between BNS mergers and short GRBs [240]. The potential for serendipitous discovery of a BNS and its short Gamma-Ray Burst (sGRB) counterpart motivate low-latency searches. These pipelines oper-ate alongside matched filtering searches and identify potential coincidences between GW triggers reported 

> 10 GW search template banks usually assign spins to be aligned with the orbital angular momentum of the binary, with magnitudes drawn from a uniform prior.

to GraceDB and high-energy transients reported by gamma-ray telescopes like Fermi-GBM, Swift and (in the past) INTEGRAL. The Rapid on-source VOEvent Coincident Monitor [RAVEN 241] is used to search for such coincidences in sky location and time. The Low-Latency Algorithm for Multi-messenger Astrophysics [LLAMA 242] pipeline performs a similar search for coincidences between GW events identified in real-time by the LVK and high-energy neutrinos (HEN). Beyond low-latency searches, there are multiple ‘tar-geted searches’ that ingest catalogs of transients and re-analyze gravitational wave data to investigate whether any associated signal has been missed in the ‘all sky’ searches that target any and all GW events. These searches are conducted using both modelled and un-modelled search methods using the PyGRB [243] and X-Pipeline [244]. No significant evidence for GW sig-nals associated with the GRBs has been found, nor for a population of unidentified subthreshold signals, since the beginning of the Advanced detector era ei-ther by LVK searches or external groups [245, 246]. These searches have focused predominantly on sGRBs; however, recent work [247] studying the potential con-nection between long GRBs (lGRBs) and GW-emitting CBC events [e.g. motivated by recent identification of kn like emission associated with some lGRBs 248, 249] also yields a null result. As GW detectors probe a greater volume of the universe, it is likely that such deep targeted searches prove more fruitful, given the vast ma-jority of GRBs we detect originate beyond the horizon of our current detectors. Nearby core collapse supernovae are also of great interest as a potential multimessenger GW source, al-though modelling of the GW emission is highly uncer-tain and the weak GW emission is only detectable for the most nearby supernovae [e.g. 250, 251]. Multimes-senger SN observations can probe the processes that oc-cur during core-collapse, with GWs providing smoking-20 gun evidence for phenomena such as bar-mode instabil-ities, standing accretion shocks, and QCD phase tran-sitions in the protoneutron star [See 83, for a detailed review]. Searches for GW emission from CCSNe out to 

∼ 20 Mpc (which encompasses the Virgo group) have been routinely carried out since O1 [252]. The recent detection of SN 2023ixf in M101 - one of the closest SN II ever observed - was used to constrain the GW lu-minosity of the event and the protoneutron star ellipticit [253]. Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) may also have origins in CO mergers. The proposal that these highly energetic bursts of coherent radio emission lasting a few tens of ms could be emitted by merging neutron star or neutron star-black hole binaries had been explored thoroughly from a theoretical perspective [e.g. see the review of 254]. Models predicting the emission of FRB-like emission from merging neutron stars at times ranging from several hours before to days after merger through mechanisms like magnetospheric interactions and mag-netic braking, or the shedding of magnetic fields by hypermassive, highly magnetised ‘magnetar’ remnants that undergo gravitational collapse as magnetic brak-ing spins down the remnant and di ff erential rotation quenches. In [255] paper, the LVK perform a deep search for gravitational wave transients associated with FRBs detected by the CHIME telescope. No signifi-cant evidence of any GW events associated with these FRBs was found, although given the large uncertainties on the distance to many of the FRBs, it is not possi-ble to entirely exclude the possibility of GW emission from NSBH mergers. This search strategy is targeted to GW emission that occurs close to the time at which the FRB is emitted, within a window of ±11 seconds. An independent search in [256] using the 4-OGC [118] GW transient catalog also returned a null result. 

6.1. The first binary neutron star merger: GW170817 

On August 17 2017 at 12:41:04 UTC, the first binary neutron star merger was detected with a combined SNR of 32.4 and FAR = 8 × 10 4 yr −1. GW170817 origi-nated from binary neutron stars with individual masses between 1 .17 − 1.60 M ⊙, with the total mass of the sys-tem MTot = 2.74 +0.04  

> −0.01

[192]. The signal was initially detected as a single-detector event present only in the LIGO-Hanford detector due to a significant glitch in the LIGO-Livingston detector just 1.1s before the merger, and the sky location of the source being in a null of the Virgo detector. The absence of any clear signal in the Virgo detector (SNR ∼ 2) was critical in reduc-ing the sky localization uncertainty of the event to only 

∼ 30 deg 2 in low-latency [15]. From the GW signal, it was possible to not only mea-sure detailed information about the mass of the merg-ing BNS system, but also to constrain features of the internal structure of the merging neutron stars [192]. The most well-constrained parameter is the chirp mass, 

M = 1.188 +0.004  

> −0.002

M⊙, while the estimates of the individ-ual masses are less precise owing to degeneracies in the mass ratio and the aligned spin components that depend strongly on the priors chosen for the spin components. A low-spin prior, motivated by stringent constraints on realistic NS EOS suggests lower individual NS masses and more equal mass ratios, with aligned spin com-ponents consistent with zero and χeff ∈ [−0.01 , 0.02] [192]. From the tidal deformability, a constraint on the neutron star radius of rNS < 13 km [51] could be ob-tained. This measurement was competitive with exist-ing constraints on the NS EOS as measured from elec-tromagnetic observations [257], and would later yield joint constraints on the EOS and the expansion rate of the Universe ( H0) when combined with observations with the NICER x-ray instrument [258]. 1.7 s after the merger that produced GW170817, the 

Fermi Gamma-ray Burst Monitor ( Fermi -GBM) de-tected a gamma-ray burst – GRB170817A. The detec-tion was announced via GCN just 14 seconds later. The same GRB was detected by the INTEGRAL satellite by the ACS of the SPI instrument via a search triggered by the Fermi GCN and the LIGO-Virgo report of the GW event. The GRB event was characterised as a ‘short’ GRB, with T90 = 2.0 ± 0.5 s 11 . The apparently coin-cident detection of a GW signal consistent with a BNS merger together with the sGRB, long theorised to orig-inate in binary neutron star mergers, triggered expan-sive observing campaigns across the world, searching for other electromagnetic counterpart emission across the electromagnetic spectrum with ground- and space-based facilities. Detailed accounts of identification of the electromagnetic counterpart can be found in [259] and the subsequent multi-wavelength follow-up e ff ort in [260]. The event has become arguably one of the most well-observed astronomical phenomena in human his-tory. 

6.2. Methods to associate GW and EM transients 

The association between GW170817 and GRB170817A provides a valuable exercise in quan-tifying the degree to which we believe that any two astrophysical transients are truly associated with one   

> 11 the time interval over which 90% of the burst fluence is accumu-lated, in this case over energies 50 −300 keV

21 another. In the frequentist context, this requires us to establish whether there is su ffi cient evidence that we can reject the null hypothesis that the sGRB and GW detection events are independent of one another. In the LVK discovery paper, this is done by breaking this null hypothesis down into the temporal and spatial asso-ciations, and evaluating the probability of spatial and temporal coincidence separately before recombining them into an overall association probability. The temporal association is more trivial: under the null hypothesis, the GW and sGRB detection events are independent Poisson processes, the probability of asso-ciation is Ptemporal = 5.0 × 10 −6, corresponding to 4 .4σ

significance in Gaussian statistics [15]. The temporal association alone, then, does not clear the threshold of ∼ 5σ for a truly unambiguous detection. However once folding in a quantification of the spatial agreement between the LIGO-Virgo sky localization of the GW source, and the Fermi GBM sky localizations, the sig-nificance improves substantially. In this specific case, this is done by defining a statistic that incorporates the posterior probabilities on the sky localization evaluated over a HEALPix pixelization of the sky that is com-pared to a background distribution that is obtained by bootstrapping a sample of 164 sGRBs that have been localized through targeted searches by GBM in an ef-fort to quantify the morphology and size distribution of GBM sGRB localizations. The combined probabil-ity of chance association is then found to be Passoc =

Ptemporal × PSpatial = (5 × 10 −6) × 0.01 = 5 × 10 −6, re-jecting the null hypothesis with a Gaussian equivalent significance of 5 .5σ - an unambigouous discovery [15] by the standards of physics. The frequentist approach is one that is often taken in the literature when evalu-ating putative multimessenger detections, however care must be taken in this approach as it requires one to care-fully quantify event rates (for example, the sGRB rate in the example above), instrument fields of view, and in the case that there are long delay times between a GW event and its claimed coincident multimessenger counterpart, to factor in the e ff ects of Earth’s rotation. This frequentist approach, particularly in the boot-strapping of the Fermi-GBM spatial response, could be seen as undesirable. For this reason, an alterna-tive method to evaluate quantify the probability of as-sociation between GWs and multimessenger signals has emerged. The Bayesian Coincident Detection Criterion (‘AC /DC’) was introduced in [261] and defines the ‘pos-terior overlap integral’ that can be used to calculate the odds ratio between the hypothesis that a GW-EM coin-cidence arises from a common source as opposed to a random chance coincidence of two unassociated events. This formulation incorporates information about the signal hypothesis directly as opposed to merely reject-ing the noise hypothesis based on Gaussian statistics. In the case of GW170817 +GRB20170817A, the AC /DC method yields a total odds ratio of OC/S S (DGW , DEM ) ≥

10 6, considered to be decisive evidence that the observa-tions arise from the same astrophysical event. The over-lap integral has been applied in a number of other theo-retical works that demonstrate how it can be used to val-idate coincidences between EM and GW events, as well as in detailed analysis of claims of EM counterparts to other gravitational wave events, including GW190521 [262] and GW190425 [263] as well as assessing coinci-dences between non-GW transients [264]. 

6.3. GW150914 and the Fermi-GBM claim 

The first detection of gravitational waves immedi-ately provoked astronomers to search for electromag-netic counterparts. This was in spite of a dearth of theoretical explanations for how such emission could be produced, as stellar mass black hole binaries that co-evolve are not expected to have a plentiful supply of matter that can interact to produce detectable ra-diation. A small handful of mechanisms were, how-ever, proposed following the detection of GW150914 [e.g. 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270]. The trigger that prompted the sudden rash of theoretical explanations for a connection between BBH mergers and electromag-netic emission derived from the apparent coincident de-tection of a low-significance gamma-ray burst candidate by the Fermi-GBM telescope. The gamma-ray emission lasted only 1 sec with a fluence of 2 − 3 × 10 −7 erg s −2,which when combined with the luminosity distance of the source suggests an isotropic equivalent energy of 

Eγ ∼ 5×10 48 erg. The proposed mechanisms have vary-ing explanations as to how a pair of merging black holes can launch a relativistic jet, ranging from the black holes involved in the merger being charged, to more conven-tional mechanisms that result in the extraction of rota-tional energy, or large magnetic fields or accretion rates from a disk that surrounds the merger remannt. The idea that the potential GRB detected by Fermi-GBM (which was not detected by any other gamma-ray ob-servatories) and GW150914 are associated has largely fallen out of favour. Nevertheless, theoretical works that posit mechanisms by which BBH mergers may produce electromagnetic emission have become more widely ac-cepted in more recent years, as evidence mounts for a population of BBH sources that have formed through dynamical interactions, potentially in gas-rich environ-ments such as AGN. 22 6.4. GW190425 and the FRB20190425A claim 

The second BNS merger GW190425 [43] o ff ered an exciting opportunity to search for electromagnetic coun-terparts. While enthusiasm for a second multimessen-ger event was buoyed by the detection of the multi-wavelength emission from GW170817, the characteris-tics of GW190425 made for a much more challenging search. The event was identified initially as a single-detector event and could only be localised to within 

∼ 1 × 10 4 deg 2 (around a third of the whole sky), and located around four times further in luminosity distance with dL ∼ 160 Mpc. An popular method to search for associations be-tween transients is to take an approach of catalog match-ing. [271] use this method to identify a putative asso-ciation between GW190425 and a CHIME FRB event FRB20190425A, which occurred 2.5 hours after the GW event was identified. Coincidences are identified by searching for CHIME FRBs that occur in a 26-hour time window about the time of merger. The window that encompasses two hours pre-merger to 24 hours post-merger, motivated by the wide variety of poten-tial emission mechanisms that can result in coherent ra-dio emission from compact binary events [272, 254]. The claim of an association between GW190425 and FRB20190425A relies on the rejection of the null hy-pothesis: that the two events are both astrophysical but originate from di ff erent, independent sources. The method is similar to that used to validate the association between GW170817 and GRB170817A [259]. There are two complicating factors that make inter-preting the null hypothesis more challenging in the case of a GW-FRB association. One must account for the relationship between the redshift (and hence luminosity distance) and dispersion measure of the source, as the distance to an FRB cannot be measured directly. More-over, in the case of [271], the long delay time between the GW event and the CHIME event ( O(10 3 s)) means that the Earth’s rotation must also be accounted for in computing the background rate of CHIME events. The coincidence is deemed marginally significant at 2 .8σ.However, explaining the coincidence requires extreme assumptions about the NS EOS that could result in the collapse of a hypermassive neutron star as large as the remanant of GW190425 ( MTot ∼ 3.4 M ⊙) so long after merger [273]. Even with mass loss of ∼ 1 M ⊙, the rem-nant would likely exceed the TOV maximum mass by a significant margin. Further investigation into the veracity of the claim was enabled by identification of the host galaxy of the FRB, UGC10667. This was done using both a proba-bilistic formalism [274] and later verified when analy-sis of the CHIME baseband data [275] enabled local-ization of the FRB to within a few tens of arcminutes. Although observations of the host galaxy itself yielded little insight into the veracity of the association of the GW event [274], a more refined analysis of the proper-ties of GW190425 with restricted localization priors re-vealed inconsistencies with the orientation of the binary system in a more thorough analysis [263]. Further op-tical followup published subsequently find no evidence for any kilonova emission associated with the BNS in the days that follow the merger [276, and see also sys-tematic followup listed in Table 2]. The significance of the association found by [271] is strongly dominated by PDM , the chance probability that one finds a CHIME FRB with a DM that is more consistent with the redshift posterior of GW190425. FRB20190425 has an unusually low DM within the CHIME sample [e.g. see Fig. blah of 274], plac-ing it close to the LVK’s O3 BNS detector horizon of 

∼ 150 Mpc - for the same reason, the event was a stand-out in the deep search analysis [255]. Based on the ob-servational evidence above, and the extreme physics re-quired for a hypermassive remanant to survive 2 .5 hr be-fore collapsing, it is thought that FRB20190425A and GW190425 are not astrophysically associated. How-ever, this coincidence claim reveals subtleties that must be considered carefully when making claims of astro-physical associations between GW events and putative counterparts. 

6.4.1. GW190521 and the AGN Flare claim 

GW190521 was detected by four real-time gravita-tional wave search pipelines on 21 May 2019 [150]. At the time, GW190521 was the most massive black hole binary system ever detected. The signal is consistent with the merger of a pair of black holes with component masses m1 = 85 M⊙, m2 = 66 M⊙. The simplest inter-pretation of the signal is that of a quasi-circular merger between two of the most massive black holes ever de-tected by the LVK. Black hole binaries with such large component masses cannot readily be explained through conventional stellar evolution models, so it has been widely accepted that the merging system responsible GW190425 formed through hierarchical mergers of dy-namically formed black holes in a dense stellar environ-ment. For this reason, the event has been reanalysed many times to search for evidence of any ‘smoking gun’ in the gravitational wave signal that can reveal the evolution-ary history of the binary black holes, for example, spin precession or any residual eccentricity that could pro-23 vide more than circumstantial evidence for successive dynamical captures (see Section 5). An interesting consequence of the formation channel proposed to explain GW150914 arises if the merger oc-curs in a gas-rich dense environment like the disc of an AGN. Various mechanisms for EM emission associated with such mergers have been proposed: The merging black holes or the merger remnant can interact with the gaseous accretion disk of the AGN through gas accre-tion or ram-pressure stripping of gas by the remnant as it is kicked through the disk after merger [277], or from the breakout emission from relativistic jets [215, 278]. Following GW190521, the Zwicky Transient Facil-ity (ZTF) identified an AGN flare that was found to be consistent with emission expected from a BBH merger occuring in an AGN [279, 280]. The flare, named ZTF19abanrhr, stood out against the background of the AGN’s intrinsic variability, and occurred around 34 days after GW190521 at a position that was evaluated to be spatially coincident with the GW event. The model invoked to explain the flare as an associated EM tran-sient invokes the ’kicked Hill sphere’ mechanism of [277], where gas that is gravitationally bound to the BBH merger remnant collides with gas in the AGN disk as the remnant recoils due to GW emission. The in-teraction between the kicked gas and the disk gas pro-duces emission at UV and optical wavelengths, visible as a luminous transient that occurs many weeks after the merger, rising above typical AGN variability. The AGN flare ZTF19abanrhr has never been con-clusively associated with GW190521. Several works have disputed the claim on various grounds, including the large localization volume of the GW source [281] which leads to a conclusion that there is a 70% chance of chance coincidence. Similarly, the result is disputed in [262] on the grounds that the common source odds range between 1-12 depending on waveform model se-lection, and in [282] based on a spatial correlation anal-ysis. In spite of this, it has been used to produce poste-rior PDFs on the Hubble constant, highlighting an im-portant opportunity [283]. If we can reliably identify BBH mergers that are ’illuminated’ by interactions with their merger environments, there is the potential to dra-matically increase the number of ‘bright sirens’ we can incorporate into our cosmology analysis (for example, GW190521 has been used as a bright siren to measure 

H0, [284]). However, mis-identifications run the risk of introducing substantial biases and systematics into such measurements that must be accounted for: there is far more work to be done on methods to establish robust associations in scenarios like that proposed to explain GW190521 +ZTF19abanrhr. 

6.5. Multimessenger sources in O3 and O4 

During O3, the dissemination of GW detections in real time through LVK Open Public Alerts (OPA) al-lowed teams of electromagnetic astronomers to perform systematic searches for EM counterparts to detected GW events. In this work, we have tabulated these sur-veys in Tables 2 and 3 based on [285] and a thorough search of literature that post-dates it. A number of searches identified transients of po-tential interest either through comprehensive follow-up strategies or dedicated targeting of specific events con-sidered of interest (see Table 6.5 for papers associated with events reported in GWTC-2.1 /3. Events not in-cluded in the catalog have been excluded from the ta-ble). The majority of these coincidences have subse-quently been ruled out. GW190814 received possibly more than its fair share of attention due to its excep-tional sky localization area ( ∼ 18 deg 2, [198]) in the context of O3 detections, and the mass posterior mak-ing the possibility that the event was a NSBH merger -and therefore many have produced detectable EM emis-sion - a real possibility. In spite of this, no convincing candidate has been detected to date associated with this event. The analysis of multimessenger searches performed during O4 are still largely ongoing. During O4, the sources that gained the most attention from the mul-timessenger community were largely those deemed to have involved at least one neutron star, however no con-vincing EM counterpart candidate has emerged from these searches. A summary of O4 events that provoked significant multi-messenger follow-up responses can be found in Table 5. This table is considered to be rela-tively complete at the time of writing with regards to events reported in GWTC-4 [8], however this space is expected to rapidly evolve with the release of GWTC-5 [324] and GWTC-6 in the coming year. 

7. Fundamental Physics from CBC events 

GWs enable us to test the fundamental properties of gravitation, providing access to the extreme grav-ity regime of the General Theory of Relativity (GR). This section does not contain an exhaustive compila-tion of results on tests of GR, but provides examples of the methods that can be employed to study fundamen-tal physics using GWs and potential extensions of both the Standard Model of particle physics, and the ΛCDM cosmological model. 24 Table 2: Summary of all-O3 systematic UVOIR follow-up programs for gravitational-wave electromagnetic counterparts. 

Collaboration / Facility Wavelength Scope Reference 

Optical / Near-Infrared survey programs 

GRANDMA (O3a) optical / NIR First half of O3; 25-telescope global network [286] GRANDMA (O3) optical / NIR 49 /56 GW alerts; ∼9000 deg 2 total coverage [287] ENGRAVE optical / NIR VLT-led EU multi-facility collaboration; GW190814 flagship campaign [288] GROWTH / ZTF (S190425z) optical ( g, r) First ZTF GW O3 alert; rapid response demonstration [289] GOTO optical ( L-band) 29 O3a GW triggers; ∼732 deg 2 avg. per event [290] DDOTI optical ( w-band) 26 /48 unretracted O3 GW alerts; rapid wide-field re-sponse [291] SAGUARO (O3 follow-up) optical 17 GW events with CSS data; Mt. Lemmon 1.5 m [292] J-GEM (galaxy-targeted) optical / NIR 23 GW events in O3 (11 BBH, 5 BNS, 4 NSBH, 1 Mass-Gap, 1 Burst, 1 Terrestrial) [293] SkyMapper optical ( i) Robotic 1.3 m follow-up; AlertSDP pipeline, iAB ≈ 20 mag [294] ASAS-SN optical ( V, g) 9 O3 events with >60% NS probability [295] ZTF / GROWTH (BNS +NSBH) optical ( g, r) 13 BNS /NSBH triggers in O3; 340 photometric points, 64 OIR spectra, 3 radio epochs [296] GECKO optical / NIR KMTNet wide-field follow-up; first three BBH events in O3a (GW190408, GW190412, GW190503) [297] ZTF + GOTO (O3b ejecta) optical Ejecta-mass constraints on O3b BNS /NSBH triggers (S191205ah, S191213g, S200115j, S200213t) [298] Multi-survey systematic optical / NIR 653 candidates from 15 O3 mergers → 66 plausible KN after vetting [299] KN detectability post-mortem optical / NIR Detectability /recoverability assessment of O3 KN searches [300] ZTF (blind 23-month KN) optical ( g, r) 23-month blind ZTF search for rapidly-evolving tran-sients; KN luminosity function and rate [301] ZTF / GROWTH (BBH AGN flares) optical ( g, r) O3 BBH localizations cross-matched to ZTF AGN flares; 9 candidates (7 O3a + 2 O3b) [302] Pan-STARRS (blind KN) optical ( griz , w) Blind KN search 2019-Oct to 2022-Dec; 29 740 tran-sients reported; 175 within 200 Mpc; spans O3b through early O4a [303] 

25 Table 3: Summary of all-O3 systematic high-energy (radio, X-ray, UV, gamma-ray, VHE) follow-up programs for gravitational-wave electromag-netic counterparts. 

Collaboration / Facility Wavelength Scope Reference 

Radio 

Apertif (WSRT, GW190425) radio (1.4 GHz) 3-epoch radio follow-up of GW190425 BNS; demonstra-tion of Apertif PAF capability [304] JAGWAR / VLA (GW191216_213338) radio (4–8 GHz, C-band) Targeted VLA search for BBH-AGN candidate counter-part to GW191216_213338 (originally identified as su-perevent candidate S191216ap) [305] 

X-ray / Ultraviolet 

Swift / XRT X-ray (0.3–10 keV) 18 GW triggers; ∼6500 pointings [306] Swift / UVOT near-UV 18 GW alerts; 424 deg 2; 27 sources + 13 cross-facility candidates [307] Swift (GW + ν coincident) X-ray + UV 4 GW + IceCube coincident searches in O3 [308] Swift / BAT (sub-threshold tar-geted) hard X-ray / soft 

γ-ray 636 sub-threshold /significant GW candidates analyzed in BAT; 86 high-purity [309] 

Gamma-ray / Very-High-Energy 

Insight-HXMT /HE 0.2–3 MeV Targeted coherent search; O2 + O3a GW events [310] H.E.S.S. (GW follow-up pro-gram) VHE γ-ray ( >100 GeV) H.E.S.S. GW rapid follow-up strategies in O2 and O3 [311] H.E.S.S. (BBH follow-up) VHE γ-ray ( >100 GeV) 4 BBH mergers (GW170814, GW190512, GW190728, S200224ca); 35–75% localization coverage [312] CALET (CGBM + CAL) 7 keV – 10 TeV X-ray /γ-ray counterparts during O3 [313] Fermi-GBM (precursor search) gamma-ray (8 keV – 40 MeV) Targeted search for modulated γ-ray precursors to O2 +

O3 CBC mergers [314] 

GW Event References Comments 

Confirmed events in GWTC-2.1 / GWTC-3 

GW190814 (UVOIR) [301, 288, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319] NSBH / BBH? Many UVOIR candidates in-cluding DG19wxnjc / AT2019npv; all ruled out, AT2019npv = SN Ib-like GW190814 (Radio) [320, 321] ASKAP J005022 −230349 and 75 VLA galaxy fields; no viable radio counterpart GW190814 (X-ray) [306] Swift-XRT pointed observations; no viable X-ray counterpart GW200105 [322] NSBH; ZTF candidates all ruled out GW200115 [322] NSBH; ZTF candidates all ruled out 7 × O3 BBH a [302, 323] 7 ZTF AGN flares cross-matched with O3 BBH localizations; 4 /7 rejected on re-analysis with extended ZTF data [323]; 2 of remaining 3 re-tain strong joint correlation 

Table 4: Follow-up of potential EM coincidences with events confirmed in GWTC-2 and GWTC-3. GW190425 and GW190521 are discussed in detail in the text and are excluded. 

26 Table 5: Follow-up of potential EM coincidences with O4 gravitational-wave events, for GW events confirmed in GWTC-4.0.          

> GW Event GW Type Coinc. Type Key Reference(s)
> Confirmed events in GWTC-4.0
> GW230518_125908 a
> (S230518h) NSBH (ER15, pre-O4a) UVOIR [325, 326, 327] GW230529_181500 (S230529ay) NSBH (lower mass gap) UVOIR;
> γ-ray /X-ray [328, 329, 326, 327] GW230627_015337 (S230627c) NSBH (sub-thresh.) UVOIR [326, 327] GW230922_020344 (S230922g) BBH (high-significance) Optical (AGN disk) [330]

7.1. Strong field tests of GR 

Despite the remarkable success of GR in predicting phenomena associated with CBCs, it may not be a com-plete theory of gravitation. This sentiment does not come from any experimental bases. Rather, GR yields a number of results such as the formation of singulari-ties [331] that cannot be readily explained without the unification of GR with another pillar on which mod-ern physics stands: quantum mechanics. Straightfor-ward attempts to reconcile GR and quantum mechanics famously fail, motivating various attempts to quantize gravity using e.g. strings [332]. To test these theories we can search for deviations in GR at energies far be-low those at which the four fundamental forces are uni-fied, thus giving insight into the fundamental theory of gravity [333]. GWs from CBC mergers can be usedn to test GR, since this is arguably the first astronomi-cal observation of a system where the non-linear e ff ects of gravity become important. This is due to the strong curvature and highly dynamical nature of the spacetime around COs during the late inspiral and the ringdown of the merger remnant. In addition, even if GR is correct at all astrophysically relevant scales probed by CBCs, the exercise of testing GR is still of critical importance: it provides a consistency check of our understanding of the physics involved in CBCs and GW emission. The majority of GR tests performed with LVK data are null tests built around a common conceptual frame-work: the best-fit GR waveform obtained via parameter estimation is subtracted from the detector data, and the residual is tested for consistency with Gaussian noise [334]. Departures from GR would appear as coher-ent structure in the residuals. This framework is ap-plied across each phase of the signal. During the in-spiral, the phase evolution of the waveform is com-pared against post-Newtonian predictions [335]. After merger, the ringdown of the remnant is tested for con-sistency with the ringdown expected from an astrophys-ical (Kerr) black hole [336]. The mass and spin that can be inferred from the remnant’s ringdown is compared with the predictions of GR from the inspiral phase of the [337] of the signal. Inconsistencies between the in-ferences made in the di ff erent phases can point to one of two things: a departure from GR predictions, or some unknown artefact introduced by systematic uncertain-ties in calibration or an unaccounted for noise transient. In GWTC-3, tests of GR [338] consistently find no statistically significant deviations from GR across a range of inspiral, merger, and ringdown tests. Be-yond tests of the orbital dynamics, GR also makes pre-cise predictions about the nature of gravitational waves themselves. For example, GR predicts exactly two ten-sor polarization modes, whereas more general theories of gravity often predict additional scalar or vector polar-ization states [339]. A detection of such modes would be a smoking-gun signature of physics beyond GR. No such detection has been made [340]. We have already alluded to a critical challenge in all tests of general relativity: distinguishing beyond-GR signatures from noise artifacts, waveform systematics, or unaccounted for astrophysics [341]. These possible false violations of GR are already relevant, e.g. in [342], where they find the event GW200129_65458 shows strong violations of GR. This is interpreted as either a data-quality issue or waveform systematic from mis-modelling of the spin precession. This underscores the importance in producing robust template BBH wave-forms including spin precession, higher order multi-poles, and eccentricity [343], and developing strin-gent methods to explore model misspecification in the Bayesian inference framework. On the other hand, some argue that to find true de-viations from GR we need to go beyond null tests, and look for specific deviations in GR predicted by alter-nate models for gravity. The production of NR wave-forms in theories of modified gravity - which is essen-27 tial to perform fully consistent tests of non-GR theo-ries rather than merely parameterised ones - remains in its infancy. Certain classes of modified theory, notably those involving spontaneous scalarization of compact objects [344], predict genuinely non-perturbative e ff ects during merger that cannot be captured by a perturbative expansion around a GR background, making dedicated NR simulations in the modified theory an unavoidable requirement [345]. 

7.2. Speed of gravity 

A fundamental prediction of the General Theory of relativity is that the speed at which gravitational waves propagate is equal to the speed of light in a vacuum. This is a non-trivial fact that is violated by many dif-ferent models of gravity beyond GR. For example, the-ories of massive gravity have been proposed to explain physics such as the accelerating expansion of our Uni-verse [346]). The strongest constraint on vg has been de-rived from the multimessenger detection of GW170817, constraining vg = c within a factor of ∼ 10 −15 [209]. Results from GWTC-4 investigate modified GW prop-agation finding results that are consistent with GR pre-dictions that vg = c [212]. 

7.3. Dark matter and exotic compact objects 

As we have previously discussed, the standard model of cosmology requires the matter content of the universe to be dominated by ‘cold dark matter’, or CDM. While it is clear that dark matter (DM) is phenomenologically re-quired to explain the emergence of large scale structure in the Universe, as well as the rotation curves of galax-ies and observations of displaced x-ray gas in galaxy haloes, the nature of DM is uncertain. One proposal is that DM is comprised of exotic, ultra-light bosonic particles. GWs o ff er a way to search for such exotic matter through the phenomenon of superra-diance, where the gravitational coupling of the bosonic wave to a BBH merger remnant. The bosonic field can then extract energy from the rotational energy of the BH, leading to a lower mass BH with reduced spin. The majority of searches for vector and scalar boson clouds around BHs have returned null results [e.g. ], except for very recent very tentative evidence reported by [347] that there could be a light scalar field of mass 

m ∼ 10 −12 eV (ln( Benv vac ) ≈ 3.5) in the environment of GW190728. An alternative explanation for DM is the presence of a hitherto-undetected population of sub-solar mass (SSM) compact objects that formed in the early Uni-verse from the collapse of primordial overdensities. These so-called ‘primordial black holes’ di ff er from the known population of sub-solar mass compact objects (white dwarf stars) as they are substantially more com-pact, and so their mergers are detectable by ground-based laser interferometers. There is also a substantial interest in SSM mergers from an astrophysical perspec-tive, as there have been several mechanisms posited for how such objects can form through processes associated with conventional stellar evolution, and how such merg-ers may produce observable EM signatures [348, 349]. Searches for SSM GWs using template banks [350] de-signed to matched-filter data to identify candidate sig-nals have so far returned null results, with no SSM events identified. However, at the time of writing one compelling candidate SSM event [351] was reported during the final weeks of O4. The most recent SSM searches by the LVK (based on data from O3) constrain the the fraction of dark matter that is comprised of pri-mordial black holes, finding fPBH ≥ 0.6 can be excluded at 90% confidence if the PBH masses are monochromat-ically distributed, however a broader PBH mass distri-bution cannot rule out fPBH = 1 [352, 353]. Similar con-straints are found by groups performing SSM searches on LVK data released to the public [e.g. 354, and refer-ences therein.] 

8. Conclusions and Future prospects for CBC popu-lations as a messenger 

The rapid development of GW astrophysics as an ob-servational science has given us a taste of the discover-ies that can be made using this unique messenger. In the somewhat biased spirit of this review, we briefly pre-view two potential avenues for GW discovery that ex-ploit the hierarchical nature of the GW detection and parameter estimation problem. These future prospects should emphasise the power of GW discovery in not just revealing some of the most extreme individual objects in the Universe, but how a combined population can be more than the sum of its parts as we probe the edges of our understanding of the cosmos. 

8.1. Post-merger GWs from neutron stars 

When two neutron stars merge, the system may promptly collapse to a black hole or, if conditions are right, form a di ff erentially rotating remnant that sur-vives the merger [355]. Such a hyper- or supramas-sive neutron star can be supported well above the max-imum mass of a cold, non-rotating star — by 30–70 per cent — through di ff erential rotation and thermal support [356, 357, 358]. Over the first ∼ 100 ms, the 28 post-merger remnant cools through processes including the emission of high-frequency ( ∼ kHz) gravitational waves [359]. Because the matter at the core of the newly formed post-merger neutron star is hot and ultradense, these signals probe a regime of the nuclear equation of state inaccessible to the inspiral, which constrains only the cold equation of state [15, 43]. An observation of post-merger GWs then o ff ers the prospect of uncov-ering temperature-dependent phase transitions in some of the densest matter in the Universe [360]. However, searches for post-merger emission from BNS mergers GW170817 [361, 362] and GW190425 [363] find no evidence for any signal, although [364, 365] claim that there may be features in the data consistent with post-merger GW emission. Our ability to extract this physics rests on waveform models conditioned on numerical-relativity (NR) simu-lations, which show that the dominant quadrupolar os-cillation frequency correlates with the compactness and tidal deformability of the remnant [366, 367, 368, 369]. These simulations are finite and unevenly sample the pa-rameter space of BNS masses, mass ratios and spins — there are, for example, too few incorporating rotational eff ects to fully characterise the relationship between the rotating maximum mass and the TOV mass [370, 371]. Analytic approximants calibrated to NR simulations achieve only modest overlaps [372, 373, 374, 375]. Nonetheless, NR and analytic approximations of wave-forms represent two complementary inference strate-gies: direct parameter estimation on a single loud event, or the use of quasi-universal relations between spectral features and physical parameters to constrain the equa-tion of state more agnostically. There is opportunity here to investigate the application of machine learning – in particular with techniques like symbolic regression – to develop enhanced waveform models that can bridge the gap between computationally expensive and numer-ically unreliable NR simulations, and well-understood but oversimplified phenomenological models. The greater promise lies in populations. Individual post-merger signals will overwhelmingly fall below the threshold for confident detection, given the poor sensi-tivity of observatories in the kHz band, and may remain so even once Cosmic Explorer[33], the Einstein Tele-scope [376], and proposed HF-optimized detectors like NEMO [377] or KAGRA-HF [378] come online [379]. Rather than waiting for a single loud event, informa-tion from many sub-threshold remnants can be com-bined coherently [380, 381, 382]. By statistically in-ferring the fraction of mergers that avoid prompt col-lapse and folding in the neutron star mass distribution measured from the inspirals, an ensemble of only 25–35 events can constrain the maximum mass of hot, rapidly rotating neutron stars — and hence the TOV mass — to ∼10–20% [383] and the NS radius to ∼ 10% [384]. These population-based approaches are comparatively forgiving of waveform model misspecification, since at low SNR a search is sensitive only to the loudest spec-tral feature, and points toward the statistical combina-tion of weak signals as the most credible near-term route to the hot nuclear equation of state. This population-driven approach can be comple-mented with an increased number of BNS inspiral ob-servations to probe the boundary between the maxi-mum neutron star mass and the minimum black hole mass. Electromagnetic observations of black holes in X-ray binaries have long suggested a dearth of com-pact objects between roughly 2 .5 − 5M⊙, a gap whose lower edge is set by the maximum neutron star mass and whose existence bears on the supernova physics gov-erning compact-object formation. Gravitational-wave populations now probe this transition from a comple-mentary direction: analyses of the compact-binary mass distribution find evidence for a change in population near 2 .4M⊙ [8], broadly consistent with predictions for the maximum neutron star mass, while events such as GW190814 and, more recently GW230529, challenge the notion that the region is empty. Combining the insights we can gain from the struc-ture of the NS and BH populations in the lower mass gap and those from sub-threshold population methods like that proposed in [382, 384, 383] can yield valu-able information about the maximum neutron star mass and minimum NS radius. As the catalogue of binary neutron star mergers grows, the combination of these population-level probes o ff ers the most promising route to resolving whether the lower mass gap is a genuine feature of compact-object formation or merely an arte-fact of sparse sampling. 

8.2. Relativistic dynamics at the center of galaxies 

The dense stellar environments at the centres of galaxies — nuclear star clusters (NSCs) and the accre-tion disks of active galactic nuclei (AGN) — represent compelling but poorly understood sites for compact ob-ject mergers, and are among the most promising tar-gets for future multi-messenger astrophysics. The fun-damental challenge is that both the detailed dynamics of compact objects in these environments and the con-ditions under which their mergers produce observable electromagnetic transients remain deeply uncertain. De-spite this, indirect evidence for an AGN contribution to the observed BBH population is accumulating, both through spatial localisation [385] and population-level 29 BBH property analyses [386]. Whether these signals are truly evidence of the AGN channel, or reflect sys-tematic uncertainties in sky localisation and population modelling, remains an open question, and the expected electromagnetic counterparts - even if they exist — may be undetectable in the most massive, luminous AGN that dominate current catalogs [387, 388, 389]. Un-derstanding when and whether BBH mergers in AGN produce observable flares, and how they connect to the underlying disk and NSC dynamics, is a key open prob-lem for multi-messenger astronomy in the LIGO era and beyond. The same galactic nuclear environments also host ex-treme mass ratio inspirals (EMRIs). An important and underexplored regime connects EMRIs to the broader stellar-mass BBH population: in AGN disks, stellar-mass black holes co-migrating toward the SMBH can be captured into a stellar mass binary, whose center of mass orbits the central SMBH. More broadly, BBH merg-ers occurring deep in the gravitational potential of the SMBH - whether driven by tidal capture [390], or disk migration [391] - represent the most complex realisation of a BBH coalescence conceivable: they involve large spins and hence significant precession, residual eccen-tricity, strong-field relativistic e ff ects from the SMBH, and gas-driven orbital dephasing [392], all simultane-ously. Even if such mergers are rare in nature, they define an upper bound on the complexity of BBH co-alescence’s and serve as a valuable theoretical testbed for waveform modelling, and therefore crucial to under-stand before any claim of a deviation from GR to be accepted. Beyond the gravitational dynamics, the AGN chan-nel is a potentially rich multi-messenger source, aris-ing from interactions of compact objects with the disc [393, 394], interactions of stars with the disc [395, 396], and the rich variety of explosive transients these envi-ronments produce. Indeed, we may already be observ-ing EMRIs electromagnetically, with disc-driven EM-RIs plausibly connected to the growing population of observed TDEs and QPEs [397, 398]. Combining GW detections of these sources with their electromagnetic counterparts would greatly enhance our understanding of the high-energy physics at galactic centers, while si-multaneously enabling precision tests of GR, and inde-pendent measurements of cosmological parameters via multi-messenger standard sirens [399]. 

8.3. Probing the standard model of cosmology with GWs 

The rapid evolution of GW cosmology, and the devel-opment of methods to exploit the standard siren prop-erty of GW emission from CBCs has demonstrated that GWs are one of the strongest competitors for a method to break the Hubble tension [209]. It is expected that with additional ‘bright siren’ sources like GW170817, and improved sky localizations increasing the accuracy and precision of the dark siren method from the GW side, could yield inferences of H0 that are accurate to around 10% in the next decade [17]. GW cosmology is presented with a challenge: to en-sure that we understand and quantify our systematic un-certainties in our measurement of H0, in much the way that has been done with other local-Universe probes of late-time expansion [400]. This will require several things to occur: for us to develop robust methods to quantify biases that can be introduced into bright siren cosmology in the process of associating EM transients with GW events. This is especially important in an era that will be defined by the detection of up to 10,000 transients per night by the Vera Rubin Telescope [401]. However, the potential for surveys like the Large Syn-optic Survey of Space and Time (LSST) with the Vera Rubin Telescope will provide highly complete galaxy calatogs, dramatically improving dark siren measure-ments of H0 [e.g. 402]. We are now ideally placed to use GWs to perform a rigorous test of our best theory that describes how our Universe formed the structures we admire with our telescopes today, and its ultimate fate into a distant and uncertain future. 

9. Acknowledgements 

FHP thanks Gavin Rowell for the invitation to write this review article. FHP is supported by a Forrest Re-search Foundation fellowship. JWNM is supported by funding from the Australian Government Research Training Program. The authors thank David Coward, Evgeni Grishin, Alessandro Trani, Paul Lasky, Eric Thrane, Ilya Mandel, Lachlan Passenger, Shun Che-ung, Mallika Sinha, Alistair McLeod, Damon Bev-eridge, Chayan Chatterjee, Manoj Kovalam, Linqing Wen, Lilli Sun, Jade Powell, Simon Stevenson, Anais Möller, Liana Rauf, Carl Blair, Chiara di Fronzo, Ju Li, Chunnong Zhao, Eric Howell and Bruce Gendre for useful discussions that have contributed to the per-spectives presented in this work. FHP acknowledges colleagues from the LVK and beyond for the informa-tive and interesting discussions we have had together over the past six years, in particular those who o ff ered feedback to improve the manuscript: Chayan Chatter-jee, Md Shaikh, Suvodip Mukherjee, Christopher Berry, Matthew Mould, Maciej Bilicki and Sharan Banagiri. 30 The authors acknowledge the support of the ARC Cen-ter of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Astronomy (OzGrav), which has played an important role in sup-porting their work and enabling national and interna-tional collaboration in GW astrophysics. In particu-lar, they acknowledge the director of OzGrav, Matthew Bailes, for creating a center that has uplifted the careers of numerous young scientists working on gravitational wave astronomy in Australia since 2017. This material is based upon work supported by NSF’s LIGO Labora-tory which is a major facility fully funded by the Na-tional Science Foundation. 

References 

[1] A. Einstein, Die Grundlage der all-gemeinen Relativitätstheorie, Annalen der Physik 354 (7) (1916) 769–822. 

doi:10.1002/andp.19163540702 .[2] F. W. Dyson, A. S. Eddington, C. David-son, Ix. a determination of the deflection of light by the sun’s gravitational field, from observations made at the total eclipse of may 29, 1919, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A: Con-taining Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character 220 (571-581) (1920) 291–333. 

arXiv:https://royalsocietypublishing. org/rsta/article-pdf/220/571-581/ 291/239997/rsta.1920.0009.pdf ,

doi:10.1098/rsta.1920.0009 .URL https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta. 1920.0009 

[3] G. M. Clemence, The Relativity E ff ect in Plane-tary Motions, Reviews of Modern Physics 19 (4) (1947) 361–364. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys. 19.361 .[4] D. Salisbury, D. Kennefick, A contextual anal-ysis of the early work of Andrzej Traut-man and Ivor Robinson on equations of motion and gravitational radiation, arXiv e-prints (2019) arXiv:1910.03753 arXiv:1910. 03753 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1910.03753 .[5] R. A. Hulse, J. H. Taylor, Discovery of a pulsar in a binary system., ApJL195 (1975) L51–L53. 

doi:10.1086/181708 .[6] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, et al., GW150914: First results from the search for binary black hole coalescence with Ad-vanced LIGO, Phys. Rev. D 93 (12) (2016) 122003. arXiv:1602.03839 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.93.122003 .[7] J. Aasi, et al., Advanced LIGO, Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2015) 074001. arXiv:1411.4547 ,

doi:10.1088/0264-9381/32/7/074001 .[8] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Atta-dio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldic-chi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, P. Bar-neo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Bar-suglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Bar-ton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedak-ihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bellie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Bev-eridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, 31 R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boettner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bon-nand, A. Borchers, S. Borhanian, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brockmueller, GWTC-4.0: Updating the Gravitational-Wave Transient Catalog with Ob-servations from the First Part of the Fourth LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA Observing Run, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2508.18082 arXiv:2508. 18082 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.18082 .[9] F. Acernese, et al., Advanced Virgo: a second-generation interferometric gravitational wave detector, Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2) (2015) 024001. arXiv:1408.3978 , doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/32/2/024001 .[10] F. Acernese, et al., Virgo status, Classical and Quantum Gravity 25 (18) (2008) 184001. doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/25/18/184001 .[11] T. Akutsu, et al., Overview of kagra: Detector design and construction history (2020). arXiv: 2005.05574 .[12] K. Somiya, Detector configuration of kagra–the japanese cryogenic gravitational-wave detector, Classical and Quantum Gravity 29 (12) (2012) 124007. URL http://stacks.iop.org/0264-9381/ 29/i=12/a=124007 

[13] Y. Aso, Y. Michimura, K. Somiya, M. Ando, O. Miyakawa, T. Sekiguchi, D. Tatsumi, H. Ya-mamoto, K. Collaboration, et al., Interferometer design of the kagra gravitational wave detector, Phys. Rev. D 88 (4) (2013) 043007. [14] H. Grote, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, The GEO 600 status, Classical and Quantum Gravity 27 (8) (2010) 084003. doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/27/8/084003 .[15] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Ad-desso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Afrough, B. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agat-suma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. Allen, A. Al-locca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, S. V. An-gelova, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, N. Arnaud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, M. Ast, S. M. As-ton, P. Astone, D. V. Atallah, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, A. Avila-Alvarez, S. Babak, P. Bacon, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, M. Bailes, P. T. Baker, F. Baldac-cini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, S. D. Barthelmy, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, C. Beer, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, J. J. Bero, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhan-dare, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, C. R. Bill-man, J. Birch, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Bis-cans, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, C. Bi-wer, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Black-man, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, A. Bohe, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, K. Bossie, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, J. E. Broida, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bul-ten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, P. Canizares, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, C. D. Ca-pano, E. Capocasa, F. Carbognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, G. Carullo, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cavalieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, P. Cerdá-Durán, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, S. J. Chamber-lin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatterjee, K. Chatzi-ioannou, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, 32 Y. Chen, H.-P. Cheng, H. Chia, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, T. Chmiel, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, A. J. K. Chua, S. Chua, A. K. W. Chung, S. Chung, G. Ciani, R. Ciolfi, C. E. Cirelli, A. Cirone, F. Clara, J. A. Clark, P. Clearwater, F. Cleva, C. Cocchieri, E. Coccia, P.-F. Cohadon, D. Co-hen, A. Colla, C. G. Collette, L. R. Comin-sky, M. Constancio, L. Conti, S. J. Cooper, P. Corban, T. R. Corbitt, I. Cordero-Carrión, K. R. Corley, N. Cornish, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, M. W. Coughlin, S. B. Cough-lin, J.-P. Coulon, S. T. Countryman, P. Cou-vares, P. B. Covas, E. E. Cowan, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, J. D. E. Creighton, T. D. Creighton, J. Cripe, S. G. Crowder, T. J. Cullen, A. Cumming, L. Cun-ningham, E. Cuoco, T. Dal Canton, G. Dálya, S. L. Danilishin, S. D’Antonio, K. Danzmann, A. Dasgupta, C. F. Da Silva Costa, V. Dattilo, I. Dave, M. Davier, D. Davis, E. J. Daw, B. Day, S. De, D. DeBra, J. Degallaix, M. De Lau-rentis, S. Deléglise, W. Del Pozzo, N. Demos, T. Denker, T. Dent, R. De Pietri, V. Dergachev, R. De Rosa, R. T. DeRosa, C. De Rossi, R. De-Salvo, O. de Varona, J. Devenson, S. Dhu-randhar, M. C. Díaz, T. Dietrich, L. Di Fiore, M. Di Giovanni, T. Di Girolamo, A. Di Lieto, S. Di Pace, I. Di Palma, F. Di Renzo, Z. Doctor, V. Dolique, F. Donovan, K. L. Dooley, S. Do-ravari, I. Dorrington, R. Douglas, M. Dovale Ál-varez, T. P. Downes, M. Drago, C. Dreissigacker, J. C. Driggers, Z. Du, M. Ducrot, R. Dudi, P. Dupej, S. E. Dwyer, T. B. Edo, M. C. Ed-wards, A. E ffl er, H.-B. Eggenstein, P. Ehrens, J. Eichholz, S. S. Eikenberry, R. A. Eisenstein, R. C. Essick, D. Estevez, Z. B. Etienne, T. Et-zel, M. Evans, T. M. Evans, M. Factourovich, V. Fafone, H. Fair, S. Fairhurst, X. Fan, S. Fari-non, B. Farr, W. M. Farr, E. J. Fauchon-Jones, M. Favata, M. Fays, C. Fee, H. Fehrmann, J. Feicht, M. M. Fejer, A. Fernandez-Galiana, I. Ferrante, E. C. Ferreira, F. Ferrini, F. Fide-caro, D. Finstad, I. Fiori, D. Fiorucci, M. Fish-bach, R. P. Fisher, M. Fitz-Axen, R. Flaminio, M. Fletcher, H. Fong, J. A. Font, P. W. F. Forsyth, S. S. Forsyth, J.-D. Fournier, S. Frasca, F. Frasconi, Z. Frei, A. Freise, R. Frey, V. Frey, E. M. Fries, P. Fritschel, V. V. Frolov, P. Fulda, M. Fy ff e, H. Gabbard, B. U. Gadre, S. M. Gaebel, J. R. Gair, L. Gammaitoni, M. R. Ganija, S. G. Gaonkar, C. Garcia-Quiros, F. Garufi, B. Gate-ley, S. Gaudio, G. Gaur, V. Gayathri, N. Gehrels, G. Gemme, E. Genin, A. Gennai, D. George, J. George, L. Gergely, V. Germain, S. Ghonge, A. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, J. A. Giaime, K. D. Giardina, A. Giazotto, K. Gill, L. Glover, E. Goetz, R. Goetz, S. Gomes, B. Goncharov, G. González, J. M. Gonzalez Castro, A. Gopaku-mar, M. L. Gorodetsky, S. E. Gossan, M. Gos-selin, R. Gouaty, A. Grado, C. Graef, M. Granata, A. Grant, S. Gras, C. Gray, G. Greco, A. C. Green, E. M. Gretarsson, P. Groot, H. Grote, S. Grunewald, P. Gruning, G. M. Guidi, X. Guo, A. Gupta, M. K. Gupta, K. E. Gushwa, E. K. Gustafson, R. Gustafson, O. Halim, B. R. Hall, E. D. Hall, E. Z. Hamilton, G. Hammond, M. Haney, M. M. Hanke, J. Hanks, C. Hanna, M. D. Hannam, O. A. Hannuksela, J. Hanson, T. Hardwick, J. Harms, G. M. Harry, I. W. Harry, M. J. Hart, C.-J. Haster, K. Haughian, J. Healy, A. Heidmann, M. C. Heintze, H. Heitmann, P. Hello, G. Hemming, M. Hendry, I. S. Heng, J. Hennig, A. W. Heptonstall, M. Heurs, S. Hild, T. Hinderer, W. C. G. Ho, D. Hoak, D. Hof-man, K. Holt, D. E. Holz, P. Hopkins, C. Horst, J. Hough, E. A. Houston, E. J. Howell, A. Hreibi, Y. M. Hu, E. A. Huerta, D. Huet, B. Hughey, S. Husa, S. H. Huttner, T. Huynh-Dinh, N. Indik, R. Inta, G. Intini, H. N. Isa, J.-M. Isac, M. Isi, B. R. Iyer, K. Izumi, T. Jacqmin, K. Jani, P. Jara-nowski, S. Jawahar, F. Jiménez-Forteza, W. W. Johnson, N. K. Johnson-McDaniel, D. I. Jones, R. Jones, R. J. G. Jonker, L. Ju, J. Junker, C. V. Kalaghatgi, V. Kalogera, B. Kamai, S. Kand-hasamy, G. Kang, J. B. Kanner, S. J. Kapadia, S. Karki, K. S. Karvinen, M. Kasprzack, W. Kas-taun, M. Katolik, E. Katsavounidis, W. Katz-man, S. Kaufer, K. Kawabe, F. Kéfélian, D. Kei-tel, A. J. Kemball, R. Kennedy, C. Kent, J. S. Key, F. Y. Khalili, I. Khan, S. Khan, Z. Khan, E. A. Khazanov, N. Kijbunchoo, C. Kim, J. C. Kim, K. Kim, W. Kim, W. S. Kim, Y.-M. Kim, S. J. Kimbrell, E. J. King, P. J. King, M. Kinley-Hanlon, R. Kirchho ff , J. S. Kissel, L. Kleybolte, S. Klimenko, T. D. Knowles, P. Koch, S. M. Koehlenbeck, S. Koley, V. Kon-drashov, A. Kontos, M. Korobko, W. Z. Ko-rth, I. Kowalska, D. B. Kozak, C. Krämer, V. Kringel, B. Krishnan, A. Królak, G. Kuehn, P. Kumar, R. Kumar, S. Kumar, L. Kuo, A. Ku-tynia, S. Kwang, B. D. Lackey, K. H. Lai, M. Landry, R. N. Lang, J. Lange, B. Lantz, R. K. Lanza, S. L. Larson, A. Lartaux-Vollard, 33 P. D. Lasky, M. Laxen, A. Lazzarini, C. Laz-zaro, P. Leaci, S. Leavey, C. H. Lee, H. K. Lee, H. M. Lee, H. W. Lee, K. Lee, J. Lehmann, A. Lenon, E. Leon, M. Leonardi, N. Leroy, N. Letendre, Y. Levin, T. G. F. Li, S. D. Linker, T. B. Littenberg, J. Liu, X. Liu, R. K. L. Lo, N. A. Lockerbie, L. T. London, J. E. Lord, M. Lorenzini, V. Loriette, M. Lormand, G. Lo-surdo, J. D. Lough, C. O. Lousto, G. Lovelace, H. Lück, D. Lumaca, A. P. Lundgren, R. Lynch, Y. Ma, R. Macas, S. Macfoy, B. Machenschalk, M. MacInnis, D. M. Macleod, I. Magaña Hernan-dez, F. Magaña Sandoval, L. Magaña Zertuche, R. M. Magee, E. Majorana, I. Maksimovic, N. Man, V. Mandic, V. Mangano, G. L. Mansell, M. Manske, M. Mantovani, F. Marchesoni, F. Marion, S. Márka, Z. Márka, C. Markakis, A. S. Markosyan, A. Markowitz, E. Maros, A. Marquina, P. Marsh, F. Martelli, L. Martellini, I. W. Martin, R. M. Martin, D. V. Martynov, J. N. Marx, K. Mason, E. Massera, A. Masserot, T. J. Massinger, M. Masso-Reid, S. Mastrogiovanni, A. Matas, F. Matichard, L. Matone, N. Maval-vala, N. Mazumder, R. McCarthy, D. E. Mc-Clelland, S. McCormick, L. McCuller, S. C. McGuire, G. McIntyre, J. McIver, D. J. Mc-Manus, L. McNeill, T. McRae, S. T. McWilliams, D. Meacher, G. D. Meadors, M. Mehmet, J. Mei-dam, E. Mejuto-Villa, A. Melatos, G. Mendell, R. A. Mercer, E. L. Merilh, M. Merzougui, S. Meshkov, C. Messenger, C. Messick, R. Met-zdor ff , P. M. Meyers, H. Miao, C. Michel, H. Middleton, E. E. Mikhailov, L. Milano, A. L. Miller, B. B. Miller, J. Miller, M. Millhouse, M. C. Milovich-Go ff , O. Minazzoli, Y. Mi-nenkov, J. Ming, C. Mishra, S. Mitra, V. P. Mitro-fanov, G. Mitselmakher, R. Mittleman, D. Mo ff a, A. Moggi, K. Mogushi, M. Mohan, S. R. P. Mo-hapatra, I. Molina, M. Montani, C. J. Moore, D. Moraru, G. Moreno, S. Morisaki, S. R. Mor-riss, B. Mours, C. M. Mow-Lowry, G. Mueller, A. W. Muir, A. Mukherjee, D. Mukher-jee, S. Mukherjee, N. Mukund, A. Mullavey, J. Munch, E. A. Muñiz, M. Muratore, P. G. Mur-ray, A. Nagar, K. Napier, I. Nardecchia, L. Nat-icchioni, R. K. Nayak, J. Neilson, G. Nele-mans, T. J. N. Nelson, M. Nery, A. Neunzert, L. Nevin, J. M. Newport, G. Newton, K. K. Y. Ng, P. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, D. Nichols, A. B. Nielsen, S. Nissanke, A. Nitz, A. Noack, F. No-cera, D. Nolting, C. North, L. K. Nuttall, J. Ober-ling, G. D. O’Dea, G. H. Ogin, J. J. Oh, S. H. Oh, F. Ohme, M. A. Okada, M. Oliver, P. Op-permann, R. J. Oram, B. O’Reilly, R. Ormis-ton, L. F. Ortega, R. O’Shaughnessy, S. Os-sokine, D. J. Ottaway, H. Overmier, B. J. Owen, A. E. Pace, J. Page, M. A. Page, A. Pai, S. A. Pai, J. R. Palamos, O. Palashov, C. Palomba, A. Pal-Singh, H. Pan, H.-W. Pan, B. Pang, P. T. H. Pang, C. Pankow, F. Pannar-ale, B. C. Pant, F. Paoletti, A. Paoli, M. A. Papa, A. Parida, W. Parker, D. Pascucci, A. Pasqualetti, R. Passaquieti, D. Passuello, M. Patil, B. Patri-celli, B. L. Pearlstone, M. Pedraza, R. Pedu-rand, L. Pekowsky, A. Pele, S. Penn, C. J. Perez, A. Perreca, L. M. Perri, H. P. Pfei ff er, M. Phelps, O. J. Piccinni, M. Pichot, F. Pier-giovanni, V. Pierro, G. Pillant, L. Pinard, I. M. Pinto, M. Pirello, M. Pitkin, M. Poe, R. Pog-giani, P. Popolizio, E. K. Porter, A. Post, J. Pow-ell, J. Prasad, J. W. W. Pratt, G. Pratten, V. Predoi, T. Prestegard, M. Prijatelj, M. Principe, S. Priv-itera, R. Prix, G. A. Prodi, L. G. Prokhorov, O. Puncken, M. Punturo, P. Puppo, M. Pürrer, H. Qi, V. Quetschke, E. A. Quintero, R. Quitzow-James, F. J. Raab, D. S. Rabeling, H. Rad-kins, P. Ra ff ai, S. Raja, C. Rajan, B. Rajbhan-dari, M. Rakhmanov, K. E. Ramirez, A. Ramos-Buades, P. Rapagnani, V. Raymond, M. Raz-zano, J. Read, T. Regimbau, L. Rei, S. Reid, D. H. Reitze, W. Ren, S. D. Reyes, F. Ricci, P. M. Ricker, S. Rieger, K. Riles, M. Rizzo, N. A. Robertson, R. Robie, F. Robinet, A. Roc-chi, L. Rolland, J. G. Rollins, V. J. Roma, J. D. Romano, R. Romano, C. L. Romel, J. H. Romie, D. Rosi´ nska, M. P. Ross, S. Rowan, A. Rüdi-ger, P. Ruggi, G. Rutins, K. Ryan, S. Sachdev, T. Sadecki, L. Sadeghian, M. Sakellariadou, L. Salconi, M. Saleem, F. Salemi, A. Samaj-dar, L. Sammut, L. M. Sampson, E. J. Sanchez, L. E. Sanchez, N. Sanchis-Gual, V. Sandberg, J. R. Sanders, B. Sassolas, B. S. Sathyaprakash, P. R. Saulson, O. Sauter, R. L. Savage, A. Sawad-sky, P. Schale, M. Scheel, J. Scheuer, J. Schmidt, P. Schmidt, R. Schnabel, R. M. S. Schofield, A. Schönbeck, E. Schreiber, D. Schuette, B. W. Schulte, B. F. Schutz, S. G. Schwalbe, J. Scott, S. M. Scott, E. Seidel, D. Sellers, A. S. Sengupta, D. Sentenac, V. Sequino, A. Sergeev, D. A. Shad-dock, T. J. Sha ff er, A. A. Shah, M. S. Shahriar, M. B. Shaner, L. Shao, B. Shapiro, P. Shawhan, A. Sheperd, D. H. Shoemaker, D. M. Shoemaker, K. Siellez, X. Siemens, M. Sieniawska, D. Sigg, A. D. Silva, L. P. Singer, A. Singh, A. Sing-34 hal, A. M. Sintes, B. J. J. Slagmolen, B. Smith, J. R. Smith, R. J. E. Smith, S. Somala, E. J. Son, J. A. Sonnenberg, B. Sorazu, F. Sorrentino, T. Souradeep, A. P. Spencer, A. K. Srivastava, K. Staats, A. Staley, M. Steinke, J. Steinlechner, S. Steinlechner, D. Steinmeyer, S. P. Stevenson, R. Stone, D. J. Stops, K. A. Strain, G. Stratta, S. E. Strigin, A. Strunk, R. Sturani, A. L. Stuver, T. Z. Summerscales, L. Sun, S. Sunil, J. Suresh, P. J. Sutton, B. L. Swinkels, M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, M. Tacca, S. C. Tait, C. Talbot, D. Talukder, D. B. Tanner, M. Tápai, A. Taracchini, J. D. Tasson, J. A. Taylor, R. Taylor, S. V. Tewari, T. Theeg, F. Thies, E. G. Thomas, M. Thomas, P. Thomas, K. A. Thorne, K. S. Thorne, E. Thrane, S. Ti-wari, V. Tiwari, K. V. Tokmakov, K. Toland, M. Tonelli, Z. Tornasi, A. Torres-Forné, C. I. Torrie, D. Töyrä, F. Travasso, G. Traylor, J. Tri-nastic, M. C. Tringali, L. Trozzo, K. W. Tsang, M. Tse, R. Tso, L. Tsukada, D. Tsuna, D. Tuyen-bayev, K. Ueno, D. Ugolini, C. S. Unnikrish-nan, A. L. Urban, S. A. Usman, H. Vahlbruch, G. Vajente, G. Valdes, M. Vallisneri, N. van Bakel, M. van Beuzekom, J. F. J. van den Brand, C. Van Den Broeck, D. C. Vander-Hyde, L. van der Schaaf, J. V. van Heijningen, A. A. van Veggel, M. Vardaro, V. Varma, S. Vass, M. Vasúth, A. Vecchio, G. Vedovato, J. Veitch, P. J. Veitch, K. Venkateswara, G. Venugopalan, D. Verkindt, F. Vetrano, A. Viceré, A. D. Viets, S. Vinciguerra, D. J. Vine, J.-Y. Vinet, S. Vi-tale, T. Vo, H. Vocca, C. Vorvick, S. P. Vy-atchanin, A. R. Wade, L. E. Wade, M. Wade, R. Walet, M. Walker, L. Wallace, S. Walsh, G. Wang, H. Wang, J. Z. Wang, W. H. Wang, Y. F. Wang, R. L. Ward, J. Warner, M. Was, J. Watchi, B. Weaver, L.-W. Wei, M. Weinert, A. J. Wein-stein, R. Weiss, L. Wen, E. K. Wessel, P. Weßels, J. Westerweck, T. Westphal, K. Wette, J. T. Whe-lan, S. E. Whitcomb, B. F. Whiting, C. Whittle, D. Wilken, D. Williams, R. D. Williams, A. R. Williamson, J. L. Willis, B. Willke, M. H. Wim-mer, W. Winkler, C. C. Wipf, H. Wittel, G. Woan, J. Woehler, J. Wo ff ord, K. W. K. Wong, J. Wor-den, J. L. Wright, D. S. Wu, D. M. Wysocki, S. Xiao, H. Yamamoto, C. C. Yancey, L. Yang, M. J. Yap, M. Yazback, H. Yu, H. Yu, M. Yvert, A. Zadro˙ zny, M. Zanolin, T. Zelenova, J.-P. Zen-dri, M. Zevin, L. Zhang, M. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y.-H. Zhang, C. Zhao, M. Zhou, Z. Zhou, S. J. Zhu, X. J. Zhu, A. B. Zimmerman, M. E. Zucker, J. Zweizig, Gw170817: Observation of gravita-tional waves from a binary neutron star inspi-ral, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2017) 161101. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.161101 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.119.161101 

[16] B. D. Metzger, G. Martínez-Pinedo, S. Darbha, E. Quataert, A. Arcones, D. Kasen, R. Thomas, P. Nugent, I. V. Panov, N. T. Zinner, Elec-tromagnetic counterparts of compact object mergers powered by the radioactive decay of r-process nuclei, MNRAS406 (2010) 2650– 2662. arXiv:1001.5029 , doi:10.1111/j. 1365-2966.2010.16864.x .[17] D. E. Holz, S. A. Hughes, Using Gravitational-Wave Standard Sirens, ApJ629 (2005) 15– 22. arXiv:arXiv:astro-ph/0504616 , doi: 10.1086/431341 .[18] A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Ad-hikari, et al., GWTC-4.0: Population Prop-erties of Merging Compact Binaries, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2508.18083 arXiv:2508. 18083 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.18083 .[19] P. C. Peters, J. Mathews, Gravitational Radiation from Point Masses in a Keplerian Orbit, Physical Review 131 (1) (1963) 435–440. doi:10.1103/ PhysRev.131.435 .[20] G. Pratten, C. García-Quirós, M. Colleoni, A. Ramos-Buades, H. Estellés, M. Mateu-Lucena, R. Jaume, M. Haney, D. Keitel, J. E. Thompson, S. Husa, Computationally e ffi cient models for the dominant and subdominant har-monic modes of precessing binary black holes, Phys. Rev. D103 (10) (2021) 104056. arXiv: 2004.06503 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.103. 104056 .[21] A. Nitz, I. Harry, D. Brown, C. M. Bi-wer, J. Willis, T. Dal Canton, C. Capano, T. Dent, L. Pekowsky, A. R. Williamson, S. De, M. Cabero, B. Machenschalk, D. Macleod, P. Kumar, F. Pannarale, S. Reyes, G. S. Cabourn Davies, Dfinstad, S. Kumar, M. Tápai, L. Singer, S. Khan, S. Fairhurst, A. Nielsen, S. Singh, T. Massinger, K. Chandra, Shasvath, Veronica-Villa, gwastro /pycbc: v2.0.5 release of PyCBC, Zenodo (Jul. 2022). doi:10.5281/zenodo. 6912865 .35 [22] A. Buonanno, Gravitational waves, arXiv e-prints (2007) arXiv:0709.4682 arXiv:0709. 4682 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.0709.4682 .[23] T. Damour, Coalescence of two spinning black holes: An e ff ective one-body approach, Phys. Rev. D 64 (2001) 124013. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.64.124013 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.64.124013 

[24] D. Gerosa, M. Kesden, U. Sperhake, E. Berti, R. O’Shaughnessy, Multi-timescale analysis of phase transitions in precessing black-hole bina-ries, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 064016. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.92.064016 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.92.064016 

[25] S. Colloms, C. P. L. Berry, J. Veitch, M. Zevin, Exploring the Evolution of Gravitational-wave Emitters with E ffi cient Emulation: Constrain-ing the Origins of Binary Black Holes Us-ing Normalizing Flows, ApJ988 (2) (2025) 189. arXiv:2503.03819 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ade546 .[26] V. Baibhav, V. Kalogera, Revising the Spin and Kick Connection in Isolated Bi-nary Black Holes, arXiv e-prints (2024) arXiv:2412.03461 arXiv:2412.03461 ,

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2412.03461 .[27] P. Schmidt, F. Ohme, M. Hannam, To-wards models of gravitational waveforms from generic binaries: II. Modelling precession ef-fects with a single eff ective precession pa-rameter, Phys. Rev. D91 (2) (2015) 024043. 

arXiv:1408.1810 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 91.024043 .[28] J. C. Bustillo, N. Sanchis-Gual, A. Torres-Forné, J. A. Font, Confusing Head-On Collisions with Precessing Intermediate-Mass Binary Black Hole Mergers, Phys. Rev. Lett.126 (20) (2021) 201101. arXiv:2009.01066 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.126.201101 .[29] M. A. Shaikh, V. Varma, H. P. Pfei ff er, A. Ramos-Buades, M. van de Meent, Defining eccentricity for gravitational wave astronomy, Phys. Rev. D108 (10) (2023) 104007. arXiv: 2302.11257 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108. 104007 .[30] A. Ramos-Buades, A. Buonanno, M. Khalil, S. Ossokine, Eff ective-one-body multipolar waveforms for eccentric binary black holes with nonprecessing spins, Phys. Rev. D105 (4) (2022) 044035. arXiv:2112.06952 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.105.044035 .[31] S. Albanesi, R. Gamba, S. Bernuzzi, J. Font-buté, A. Gonzalez, A. Nagar, E ff ective-one-body modeling for generic compact binaries with arbi-trary orbits, Phys. Rev. D 112 (2025) L121503. 

doi:10.1103/3snf-w1x7 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ 3snf-w1x7 

[32] M. A. Shaikh, V. Varma, A. Ramos-Buades, H. P. Pfei ff er, M. Boyle, L. E. Kidder, M. A. Scheel, Defining eccentricity for spin-precessing binaries, Classical and Quantum Gravity 42 (19) (2025) 195012. arXiv:2507.08345 , doi:10. 1088/1361-6382/ae085d .[33] D. Reitze, R. X. Adhikari, S. Ballmer, B. Barish, L. Barsotti, G. Billingsley, D. A. Brown, Y. Chen, D. Coyne, R. Eisenstein, M. Evans, P. Fritschel, E. D. Hall, A. Lazzarini, G. Lovelace, J. Read, B. S. Sathyaprakash, D. Shoemaker, J. Smith, C. Torrie, S. Vitale, R. Weiss, C. Wipf, M. Zucker, Cosmic Explorer: The U.S. Contri-bution to Gravitational-Wave Astronomy beyond LIGO, in: Bulletin of the American Astronomi-cal Society, Vol. 51, 2019, p. 35. arXiv:1907. 04833 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1907.04833 .[34] P. Amaro-Seoane, J. Andrews, M. Arca Sedda, A. Askar, Q. Baghi, R. Balasov, I. Bartos, S. S. Bavera, J. Bellovary, C. P. L. Berry, E. Berti, S. Bianchi, L. Blecha, S. Blondin, T. Bog-danovi´ c, S. Boissier, M. Bonetti, S. Bonoli, E. Bortolas, K. Breivik, P. R. Capelo, L. Ca-ramete, F. Cattorini, M. Charisi, S. Chaty, X. Chen, M. Chru´ sli´ nska, A. J. K. Chua, R. Church, M. Colpi, D. D’Orazio, C. Daniel-ski, M. B. Davies, P. Dayal, A. De Rosa, A. Derdzinski, K. Destounis, M. Dotti, I. Du¸ tan, I. Dvorkin, G. Fabj, T. Foglizzo, S. Ford, J.-B. Fouvry, A. Franchini, T. Fragos, C. Fryer, M. Gaspari, D. Gerosa, L. Graziani, P. Groot, M. Habouzit, D. Haggard, Z. Haiman, W.-B. Han, A. Istrate, P. H. Johansson, F. M. Khan, T. Kimpson, K. Kokkotas, A. Kong, V. Korol, K. Kremer, T. Kupfer, A. Lamberts, S. Larson, M. Lau, D. Liu, N. Lloyd-Ronning, G. Lodato, 36 A. Lupi, C.-P. Ma, T. Maccarone, I. Mandel, A. Mangiagli, M. Mapelli, S. Mathis, L. Mayer, S. McGee, B. McKernan, M. C. Miller, D. F. Mota, M. Mumpower, S. S. Nasim, G. Nelemans, S. Noble, F. Pacucci, F. Panessa, V. Pascha-lidis, H. Pfister, D. Porquet, J. Quenby, A. Ri-carte, F. K. Röpke, J. Regan, S. Rosswog, A. Ruiter, M. Ruiz, J. Runnoe, R. Schneider, J. Schnittman, A. Secunda, A. Sesana, N. Seto, L. Shao, S. Shapiro, C. Sopuerta, N. C. Stone, A. Suvorov, N. Tamanini, T. Tamfal, T. Tauris, K. Temmink, J. Tomsick, S. Toonen, A. Torres-Orjuela, M. Toscani, A. Tsokaros, C. Unal, V. Vázquez-Aceves, R. Valiante, M. van Put-ten, J. van Roestel, C. Vignali, M. Volonteri, K. Wu, Z. Younsi, S. Yu, S. Zane, L. Zwick, F. Antonini, V. Baibhav, E. Barausse, A. Bonilla Rivera, M. Branchesi, G. Branduardi-Raymont, K. Burdge, S. Chakraborty, J. Cuadra, K. Dage, B. Davis, S. E. de Mink, R. Decarli, D. Doneva, S. Esco ffi er, P. Gandhi, F. Haardt, C. O. Lousto, S. Nissanke, J. Nordhaus, R. O’Shaughnessy, S. Portegies Zwart, A. Pound, F. Schus-sler, O. Sergijenko, A. Spallicci, D. Vernieri, A. Vigna-Gómez, Astrophysics with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, Living Reviews in Relativity 26 (1) (2023) 2. arXiv:2203. 06016 , doi:10.1007/s41114-022-00041-y .[35] E.-K. Li, S. Liu, A. Torres-Orjuela, X. Chen, K. Inayoshi, L. Wang, Y.-M. Hu, P. Amaro-Seoane, A. Askar, C. Bambi, P. R. Capelo, H.-Y. Chen, A. J. K. Chua, E. Condés-Breña, L. Dai, D. Das, A. Derdzinski, H.-M. Fan, M. Fujii, J. Gao, M. Garg, H. Ge, M. Giersz, S.-J. Huang, A. Hypki, Z.-C. Liang, B. Liu, D. Liu, M. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Mayer, N. R. Napolitano, P. Peng, Y. Shao, S. Shashank, R. Shen, H. Tagawa, A. Tanikawa, M. Toscani, V. Vázquez-Aceves, H.-T. Wang, H. Wang, S.-X. Yi, J.-d. Zhang, X.-T. Zhang, L. Zhu, L. Zwick, S. Huang, J. Mei, Y. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Zhang, J. Luo, Gravitational wave astronomy with TianQin, Re-ports on Progress in Physics 88 (5) (2025) 056901. arXiv:2409.19665 , doi:10.1088/ 1361-6633/adc9be .[36] J. W. N. Moncrie ff , E. Grishin, A. A. Trani, F. H. Panther, O. Pietrosanti, Not all roads lead to merger: AGN disc properties influence the in-teractions of highly unequal mass black holes, MNRAS545 (3) (2026) staf2217. arXiv:2511. 09129 , doi:10.1093/mnras/staf2217 .[37] B. Kocsis, J. Levin, Repeated bursts from rel-ativistic scattering of compact objects in galac-tic nuclei, Phys. Rev. D85 (12) (2012) 123005. 

arXiv:1109.4170 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 85.123005 .[38] Z. Pan, H. Yang, Formation rate of extreme mass ratio inspirals in active galactic nuclei, Phys. Rev. D103 (10) (2021) 103018. arXiv: 2101.09146 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.103. 103018 .[39] D. Mancieri, L. Broggi, M. Vinciguerra, A. Sesana, M. Bonetti, Eccentricity dis-tribution of extreme mass ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev. D113 (4) (2026) 043062. arXiv: 2509.02394 , doi:10.1103/vq2j-kbhs .[40] E. Grishin, I. M. Romero-Shaw, A. A. Trani, Gravitational-wave signatures of highly eccentric stellar-mass binary black holes in galactic nu-clei, MNRAS547 (2) (2026) stag262. arXiv: 2510.13066 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stag262 .[41] S. Rosswog, P. Diener, F. Torsello, T. M. Tauris, N. Sarin, Mergers of double NSs with one high-spin component: brighter kilonovae and fall-back accretion, weaker gravitational waves, MN-RAS530 (2) (2024) 2336–2354. arXiv:2310. 15920 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stae454 .[42] B. Farr, C. P. L. Berry, W. M. Farr, C.-J. Haster, H. Middleton, K. Cannon, P. B. Gra ff , C. Hanna, I. Mandel, C. Pankow, L. R. Price, T. Sidery, L. P. Singer, A. L. Urban, A. Vecchio, J. Veitch, S. Vitale, Parameter Estimation on Gravitational Waves from Neutron-star Binaries with Spinning Components, ApJ825 (2) (2016) 116. arXiv: 1508.05336 , doi:10.3847/0004-637X/825/ 2/116 .[43] B. P. Abbott, et al., GW190425: Observation of a Compact Binary Coalescence with Total Mass ∼ 3.4M⊙, Astrophys. J. Lett. 892 (1) (2020) L3. arXiv:2001.01761 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ab75f5 .[44] J. Samsing, Eccentric black hole mergers form-ing in globular clusters, Phys. Rev. D97 (10) (2018) 103014. arXiv:1711.07452 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.97.10301410. 48550/arXiv.1711.07452 .[45] H. Tagawa, Z. Haiman, B. Kocsis, Formation and evolution of compact-object binaries in agn 37 disks, The Astrophysical Journal 898 (1) (2020) 25. [46] M. Dominik, K. Belczynski, C. Fryer, D. E. Holz, E. Berti, T. Bulik, I. Mandel, R. O’Shaughnessy, Double compact objects. i. the significance of the common envelope on merger rates, The Astrophysical Journal 759 (1) (2012) 52. 

doi:10.1088/0004-637X/759/1/52 .URL https://doi.org/10.1088/ 0004-637X/759/1/52 

[47] I. Mandel, S. E. de Mink, Merging binary black holes formed through chemically homogeneous evolution in short-period stellar binaries, MN-RAS458 (3) (2016) 2634–2647. arXiv:1601. 00007 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stw379 .[48] H. Tagawa, T. R. Saitoh, B. Kocsis, Compact object mergers driven by gas fallback, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) 261101. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.120.261101 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.120.261101 

[49] J. M. Lattimer, M. Prakash, Neutron Star Struc-ture and the Equation of State, ApJ550 (1) (2001) 426–442. arXiv:astro-ph/0002232 , doi: 10.1086/319702 .[50] T. Binnington, E. Poisson, Relativistic theory of tidal Love numbers, Phys. Rev. D80 (8) (2009) 084018. arXiv:0906.1366 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.80.084018 .[51] C. A. Raithel, F. Özel, D. Psaltis, Tidal De-formability from GW170817 as a Direct Probe of the Neutron Star Radius, ApJL857 (2) (2018) L23. arXiv:1803.07687 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/aabcbf .[52] É. É. Flanagan, T. Hinderer, Constrain-ing neutron-star tidal Love numbers with gravitational-wave detectors, Phys. Rev. D77 (2) (2008) 021502. arXiv:0709.1915 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.77.021502 .[53] K. Chatziioannou, Neutron-star tidal deforma-bility and equation-of-state constraints, Gen-eral Relativity and Gravitation 52 (11) (2020) 109. arXiv:2006.03168 , doi:10.1007/ s10714-020-02754-3 .[54] T. Hinderer, B. D. Lackey, R. N. Lang, J. S. Read, Tidal deformability of neutron stars with realis-tic equations of state and their gravitational wave signatures in binary inspiral, Phys. Rev. D 81 (2010) 123016. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.81. 123016 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.81.123016 

[55] J. S. Read, C. Markakis, M. Shibata, K. b. o. Ury¯ u, J. D. E. Creighton, J. L. Friedman, Measur-ing the neutron star equation of state with gravita-tional wave observations, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 124033. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.79.124033 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.79.124033 

[56] K. Kyutoku, H. Okawa, M. Shibata, K. Taniguchi, Gravitational waves from spinning black hole-neutron star binaries: dependence on black hole spins and on neutron star equations of state, Phys. Rev. D84 (6) (2011) 064018. arXiv:1108.1189 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.064018 .[57] F. Foucart, Black-hole-neutron-star mergers: Disk mass predictions, Phys. Rev. D86 (12) (2012) 124007. arXiv:1207.6304 , doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.86.124007 .[58] M. Hannam, D. A. Brown, S. Fairhurst, C. L. Fryer, I. W. Harry, When can Gravitational-wave Observations Distinguish between Black Holes and Neutron Stars?, ApJL766 (1) (2013) L14. arXiv:1301.5616 , doi:10.1088/ 2041-8205/766/1/L14 .[59] T. A. Clarke, L. Chastain, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, Nuclear Physics with Gravitational Waves from Neutron Stars Disrupted by Black Holes, ApJL949 (1) (2023) L6. arXiv:2302. 09711 , doi:10.3847/2041-8213/acd33b .[60] C. Mills, S. Fairhurst, Measuring gravitational-wave higher-order mul-tipoles, Phys. Rev. D103 (2) (2021) 024042. arXiv:2007.04313 , doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.103.024042 .[61] R. Cotesta, S. Marsat, M. Pürrer, Frequency-domain reduced-order model of aligned-spin eff ective-one-body waveforms with higher-order modes, Phys. Rev. D101 (12) (2020) 124040. arXiv:2003.12079 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.101.124040 .[62] S. A. Usman, J. C. Mills, S. Fairhurst, Con-straining the inclinations of binary mergers 38 from gravitational-wave observations, The Astrophysical Journal 877 (2) (2019) 82. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab0b3e .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab0b3e 

[63] A. Freise, K. Strain, Interferometer Techniques for Gravitational-Wave Detection, Living Re-views in Relativity 13 (1) (2010) 1. arXiv: 0909.3661 , doi:10.12942/lrr-2010-1 .[64] LIGO data analysis software working group, Ligo algorithm library, https: //www.lsc-group.phys.uwm.edu/daswg/ projects/lalsuite.html (2013). [65] G. Ashton, M. Hübner, P. D. Lasky, C. Talbot, K. Ackley, S. Biscoveanu, Q. Chu, A. Divakarla, P. J. Easter, B. Goncharov, F. Hernandez Vi-vanco, J. Harms, M. E. Lower, G. D. Meadors, D. Melchor, E. Payne, M. D. Pitkin, J. Pow-ell, N. Sarin, R. J. E. Smith, E. Thrane, BILBY: A User-friendly Bayesian Inference Library for Gravitational-wave Astronomy, ApJS241 (2) (2019) 27. arXiv:1811.02042 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4365/ab06fc .[66] S. Borhanian, GWBENCH: a novel Fisher in-formation package for gravitational-wave bench-marking, Classical and Quantum Gravity 38 (17) (2021) 175014. arXiv:2010.15202 , doi:10. 1088/1361-6382/ac1618 .[67] A. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. Adhikari, V. Adkins, et al., Gwtc-4.0: Population properties of merging com-pact binaries, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18083 (2025). [68] L. S. Finn, Detection, measurement, and gravita-tional radiation, Phys. Rev. D 46 (1992) 5236– 5249. arXiv:arXiv:gr-qc/9209010 , doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.46.5236 .[69] B. Allen, W. G. Anderson, P. R. Brady, D. A. Brown, J. D. E. Creighton, FIND-CHIRP: An algorithm for detection of gravitational waves from inspiraling compact binaries, Phys. Rev. D85 (12) (2012) 122006. arXiv:gr-qc/0509116 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.85.122006 .[70] B. Allen, χ2 time-frequency discriminator for gravitational wave detection, Phys. Rev. D71 (6) (2005) 062001. arXiv:gr-qc/0405045 , doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.71.062001 .[71] C. Cutler, É. E. Flanagan, Gravitational waves from merging compact binaries: How accurately can one extract the binary’s parameters from the inspiral waveform \?, Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 2658–2697. arXiv:arXiv:gr-qc/9402014 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.49.2658 .[72] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, D. Agar-wal, M. Agathos, M. Aghaei Abchouyeh, O. D. Aguiar, S. Ahmadzadeh, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, S. Akcay, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Al-Jodah, C. Alléné, A. Al-locca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Altin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, O. Amarasinghe, A. Amato, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, T. Andrade, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Ap-pavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, L. Argianas, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. As-sis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Aval-lone, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, E. Bagui, L. Baiotti, R. Ba-jpai, T. Baka, T. Baker, M. Ball, G. Bal-lardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Baner-jee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Bar-man, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, S. Basak, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, D. E. Bates, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Bay-nard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beir-naert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bellie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, S. A. Bhat, R. Bhatt, D. Bhat-tacharjee, S. Bhaumik, S. Bhowmick, V. Bian-calana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billings-39 ley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bol-ingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bon-darescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, A. Borchers, S. Borhanian, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, A. Boudon, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brockmueller, A. F. Brooks, B. C. Brown, D. D. Brown, M. L. Brozzetti, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, Y. Bu, GWTC-4.0: Methods for Identifying and Character-izing Gravitational-wave Transients, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2508.18081 arXiv:2508. 18081 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.18081 .[73] B. Allen, Optimal template banks, Phys. Rev. D104 (4) (2021) 042005. 

arXiv:2102.11254 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.104.042005 .[74] D. Mukherjee, et al., The GstLAL template bank for spinning compact binary mergers in the sec-ond observation run of Advanced LIGO and Virgo (12 2018). arXiv:1812.05121 .[75] N. Indik, K. Haris, T. Dal Canton, H. Fehrmann, B. Krishnan, A. Lundgren, A. B. Nielsen, A. Pai, Stochastic template bank for gravitational wave searches for precessing neutron-star–black-hole coalescence events, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 064056. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.95.064056 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.95.064056 

[76] K. Kacanja, A. H. Nitz, S. Wu, M. Cusi-nato, R. Dhurkunde, I. Harry, T. Dal Canton, F. Pannarale, E ffi cient Stochastic Template Bank Using Inner Product Inequalities, ApJ975 (2) (2024) 212. arXiv:2407.03406 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/ad7d87 .[77] D. Davis, T. B. Littenberg, I. M. Romero-Shaw, M. Millhouse, J. McIver, F. Di Renzo, G. Ashton, Subtracting glitches from gravitational-wave de-tector data during the third LIGO-Virgo observ-ing run, Classical and Quantum Gravity 39 (24) (2022) 245013. arXiv:2207.03429 , doi:10. 1088/1361-6382/aca238 .[78] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. Abbott, M. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, M. Adamo, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, et al., Characterization of transient noise in advanced ligo relevant to grav-itational wave signal gw150914, Classical and Quantum Gravity 33 (13) (2016) 134001. [79] M. Was, M.-A. Bizouard, V. Brisson, F. Cav-alier, M. Davier, P. Hello, N. Leroy, F. Robi-net, M. Vavoulidis, On the background estima-tion by time slides in a network of gravitational wave detectors, Class. Quant. Grav. 27 (2010) 015005. arXiv:0906.2120 , doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/27/1/015005 .[80] G. S. Cabourn Davies, I. W. Harry, Establishing significance of gravitational-wave signals from a single observatory in the PyCBC o ffl ine search, Classical and Quantum Gravity 39 (21) (2022) 215012. arXiv:2203.08545 , doi:10.1088/ 1361-6382/ac8862 .[81] S. Klimenko, G. Vedovato, M. Drago, F. Salemi, V. Tiwari, G. A. Prodi, C. Lazzaro, K. Ack-ley, S. Tiwari, C. F. Da Silva, G. Mitsel-makher, Method for detection and reconstruction of gravitational wave transients with networks of advanced detectors, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 042004. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.042004 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.93.042004 

[82] N. J. Cornish, T. B. Littenberg, Bayeswave: Bayesian inference for gravitational wave bursts and instrument glitches, Clas-sical and Quantum Gravity 32 (13) (2015) 135012. arXiv:1410.3835 ,

doi:10.1088/0264-9381/32/13/135012 .[83] J. Powell, P. D. Lasky, The Dawes Review 12: Gravitational-wave burst astrophysics, PASA42 (2025) e030. arXiv:2410.12105 , doi:10. 1017/pasa.2025.10 .[84] N. Christensen, R. Meyer, Parameter estima-tion with gravitational waves, Reviews of Mod-ern Physics 94 (2) (2022) 025001. arXiv: 2204.04449 , doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.94. 025001 .[85] J. Veitch, V. Raymond, B. Farr, W. Farr, P. Gra ff ,S. Vitale, B. Aylott, K. Blackburn, N. Chris-tensen, M. Coughlin, W. Del Pozzo, F. Feroz, J. Gair, C. J. Haster, V. Kalogera, T. Litten-berg, I. Mandel, R. O’Shaughnessy, M. Pitkin, 40 C. Rodriguez, C. Röver, T. Sidery, R. Smith, M. Van Der Sluys, A. Vecchio, W. Vous-den, L. Wade, Parameter estimation for com-pact binaries with ground-based gravitational-wave observations using the LALInference soft-ware library, Phys. Rev. D91 (4) (2015) 042003. 

arXiv:1409.7215 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 91.042003 .[86] I. M. Romero-Shaw, C. Talbot, S. Biscov-eanu, V. D’Emilio, G. Ashton, C. P. L. Berry, S. Coughlin, S. Galaudage, C. Hoy, M. Hübner, K. S. Phukon, M. Pitkin, M. Rizzo, N. Sarin, R. Smith, S. Stevenson, A. Vajpeyi, M. Arène, K. Athar, S. Banagiri, N. Bose, M. Carney, K. Chatziioannou, J. A. Clark, M. Colleoni, R. Cotesta, B. Edelman, H. Estellés, C. García-Quirós, A. Ghosh, R. Green, C.-J. Haster, S. Husa, D. Keitel, A. X. Kim, F. Hernandez-Vivanco, I. Magaña Hernandez, C. Karathana-sis, P. D. Lasky, N. De Lillo, M. E. Lower, D. Macleod, M. Mateu-Lucena, A. Miller, M. Millhouse, S. Morisaki, S. H. Oh, S. Os-sokine, E. Payne, J. Powell, G. Pratten, M. Pür-rer, A. Ramos-Buades, V. Raymond, E. Thrane, J. Veitch, D. Williams, M. J. Williams, L. Xiao, Bayesian inference for compact binary coales-cences with BILBY: validation and application to the first LIGO-Virgo gravitational-wave tran-sient catalogue, MNRAS499 (3) (2020) 3295– 3319. arXiv:2006.00714 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/staa2850 .[87] J. Skilling, Nested Sampling, in: R. Fischer, R. Preuss, U. V. Toussaint (Eds.), Bayesian In-ference and Maximum Entropy Methods in Sci-ence and Engineering: 24th International Work-shop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum En-tropy Methods in Science and Engineering, Vol. 735 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, AIP, 2004, pp. 395–405. doi:10.1063/ 1.1835238 .[88] G. S. Davies, T. Dent, M. Tápai, I. Harry, C. McIsaac, A. H. Nitz, Extending the pycbc search for gravitational waves from compact bi-nary mergers to a global network, Phys. Rev. D 102 (2020) 022004. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 102.022004 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.102.022004 

[89] C. Messick, et al., Analysis framework for the prompt discovery of compact binary mergers in gravitational-wave data, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 042001. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.95.042001 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.95.042001 

[90] S. Sachdev, et al., The GstLAL Search Analy-sis Methods for Compact Binary Mergers in Ad-vanced LIGO’s Second and Advanced Virgo’s First Observing Runs (2019). arXiv:1901. 08580 .[91] D. Buskulic, Virgo Collaboration, LIGO Sci-entific Collaboration, Very low latency search pipeline for low mass compact binary coales-cences in the LIGO S6 and Virgo VSR2 data, Classical and Quantum Gravity 27 (19) (2010) 194013. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/27/19/ 194013 .[92] T. Adams, D. Buskulic, V. Germain, G. Guidi, F. Marion, M. Montani, B. Mours, F. Piergio-vanni, G. Wang, Low-latency analysis pipeline for compact binary coalescences in the ad-vanced gravitational wave detector era, Class. Quant. Grav. 33 (17) (2016) 175012. arXiv: 1512.02864 , doi:10.1088/0264-9381/33/ 17/175012 .[93] S. Hooper, S. K. Chung, J. Luan, D. Blair, Y. Chen, L. Wen, Summed Parallel Infinite Im-pulse Response (SPIIR) Filters For Low-Latency Gravitational Wave Detection, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 024012. arXiv:1108.3186 , doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.86.024012 .[94] Q. Chu, M. Kovalam, L. Wen, T. Slaven-Blair, J. Bosveld, Y. Chen, P. Clearwater, A. Codor-eanu, Z. Du, X. Guo, X. Guo, K. Kim, T. G. F. Li, V. Oloworaran, F. Panther, J. Pow-ell, A. S. Sengupta, K. Wette, X. Zhu, SPIIR online coherent pipeline to search for gravita-tional waves from compact binary coalescences, Phys. Rev. D105 (2) (2022) 024023. arXiv: 2109.14183 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.105. 024023 .[95] E. Marx, W. Benoit, A. Gunny, R. Omer, D. Chat-terjee, R. C. Venterea, L. Wills, M. Saleem, E. Moreno, R. Raikman, E. Govorkova, M. De-sai, J. Krupa, D. Rankin, M. W. Coughlin, P. Har-ris, E. Katsavounidis, Machine-learning pipeline for real-time detection of gravitational waves from compact binary coalescences, Phys. Rev. D 111 (2025) 042010. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 

41 111.042010 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.111.042010 

[96] T. Mishra, S. Bhaumik, V. Gayathri, M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, I. Bartos, S. Klimenko, Grav-itational waves detected by a burst search in ligo /virgo’s third observing run, Phys. Rev. D 111 (2025) 023054. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.111. 023054 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.111.023054 

[97] S. Caudill, S. Kandhasamy, C. Lazzaro, A. Matas, M. Sieniawska, A. L. Stu-ver, Gravitational-wave searches in the era of Advanced LIGO and Virgo, Mod-ern Physics Letters A 36 (23) (2021) 2130022–458. arXiv:2108.01184 ,

doi:10.1142/S0217732321300226 .[98] L. P. Singer, L. R. Price, Rapid Bayesian position reconstruction for gravitational-wave transients, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2) (2016) 024013. arXiv:1508.03634 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.024013 .[99] X. Guo, Q. Chu, Z. Du, L. Went, Gpu-optimised low-latency online search for gravitational waves from binary coalescences, in: 2018 26th Euro-pean Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), IEEE, 2018, pp. 2638–2642. [100] C. Talbot, R. Smith, E. Thrane, G. B. Poole, Parallelized inference for gravitational-wave astronomy, Phys. Rev. D100 (4) (2019) 043030. arXiv:1904.02863 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.100.043030 .[101] L. Tsukada, K. Cannon, C. Hanna, D. Keppel, D. Meacher, C. Messick, Application of a zero-latency whitening filter to compact binary coa-lescence gravitational-wave searches, Phys. Rev. D 97 (2018) 103009. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 97.103009 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.97.103009 

[102] R. J. E. Smith, G. Ashton, A. Vajpeyi, C. Tal-bot, Massively parallel Bayesian inference for transient gravitational-wave astronomy, MN-RAS498 (3) (2020) 4492–4502. arXiv:1909. 11873 , doi:10.1093/mnras/staa2483 .[103] J. Lange, R. O’Shaughnessy, M. Rizzo, Rapid and accurate parameter inference for coalesc-ing, precessing compact binaries, arXiv e-prints (2018) arXiv:1805.10457 arXiv:1805. 10457 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1805.10457 .[104] J. Wo ff ord, A. B. Yelikar, H. Gallagher, E. Cham-pion, D. Wysocki, V. Delfavero, J. Lange, C. Rose, V. Valsan, S. Morisaki, J. Read, C. Henshaw, R. O’Shaughnessy, Improving per-formance for gravitational-wave parameter infer-ence with an e ffi cient and highly-parallelized al-gorithm, Phys. Rev. D 107 (2023) 024040. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.107.024040 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.107.024040 

[105] D. Williams, J. Veitch, M. Chiofalo, P. Schmidt, R. Udall, A. Vajpeji, C. Hoy, Asimov: Aframework for coordinating parameter estimation workflows, The Journal of Open Source Soft-ware 8 (84) (2023) 4170. arXiv:2207.01468 ,

doi:10.21105/joss.04170 .[106] E. Cuoco, M. Cavaglià, I. S. Heng, D. Keitel, C. Messenger, Applications of machine learning in gravitational-wave research with current in-terferometric detectors: Applications of machine learning in gravitational-wave..., Living Reviews in Relativity 28 (1) (2025) 2. arXiv:2412. 15046 , doi:10.1007/s41114-024-00055-8 .[107] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, S. Akcay, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Am-ato, C. Anand, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, T. An-drade, N. Andres, T. Andri´ c, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, K. Arai, Y. Arai, S. Araki, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arit-omi, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Badger, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, L. Baiotti, J. Baird, R. Bajpai, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, 42 S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Ba-nagiri, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Be-jger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. BenYaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, U. Bhardwaj, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, R. Birney, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, M. Boldrini, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bouf-fanais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. Brandt, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, G. S. Cabourn Davies, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. Cameron, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, S. Canevarolo, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, Z. Cao, E. Capocasa, E. Capote, G. Carapella, F. Carbognani, J. B. Carlin, M. F. Carney, M. Carpinelli, G. Car-rillo, G. Carullo, T. L. Carver, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, G. Castaldi, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cavalieri, M. Ceasar, G. Cella, P. Cerdá-Durán, E. Cesarini, W. Chaibi, K. Chakravarti, S. Chalathadka Subrahmanya, E. Champion, C. H. Chan, C. Chan, C. L. Chan, K. Chan, M. Chan, K. Chandra, P. Chanial, S. Chao, C. E. A. Chapman-Bird, P. Charlton, E. A. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, C. Chatterjee, D. Chatterjee, D. Chatterjee, M. Chaturvedi, S. Chaty, K. Chatziioannou, C. Chen, H. Y. Chen, J. Chen, K. Chen, X. Chen, Y. B. Chen, Y. R. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Cheng, C. K. Cheong, H. Y. Cheung, H. Y. Chia, F. Chiadini, C.-Y. Chiang, G. Chiarini, R. Chierici, A. Chincar-ini, M. L. Chiofalo, A. Chiummo, G. Cho, H. S. Cho, R. K. Choudhary, S. Choudhary, N. Christensen, H. Chu, Q. Chu, Y.-K. Chu, S. Chua, K. W. Chung, G. Ciani, P. Ciecielag, M. Cie´ slar, M. Cifaldi, A. A. Ciobanu, R. Ciolfi, F. Cipriano, A. Cirone, F. Clara, E. N. Clark, J. A. Clark, L. Clarke, P. Clearwater, S. Clesse, F. Cleva, E. Coccia, E. Codazzo, P. F. Cohadon, D. E. Cohen, L. Cohen, M. Colleoni, C. G. Collette, A. Colombo, M. Colpi, C. M. Comp-ton, J. Constancio, M., L. Conti, S. J. Cooper, P. Corban, T. R. Corbitt, I. Cordero-Carrión, S. Corezzi, K. R. Corley, N. Cornish, D. Corre, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, R. Cotesta, M. W. Coughlin, J. P. Coulon, S. T. Country-man, B. Cousins, P. Couvares, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, J. D. E. Creighton, T. D. Creighton, A. W. Criswell, M. Croquette, S. G. Crowder, J. R. Cudell, T. J. Cullen, A. Cumming, R. Cummings, L. Cun-ningham, E. Cuoco, M. Curyło, P. Dabadie, T. Dal Canton, S. Dall’Osso, G. Dálya, A. Dana, L. M. DaneshgaranBajastani, B. D’Angelo, B. Danila, S. Danilishin, S. D’Antonio, K. Danz-mann, C. Darsow-Fromm, A. Dasgupta, L. E. H. Datrier, S. Datta, V. Dattilo, I. Dave, M. Davier, D. Davis, M. C. Davis, E. J. Daw, P. F. de Alarcón, R. Dean, D. DeBra, M. Deenadayalan, J. Degallaix, M. De Laurentis, S. Deléglise, V. Del Favero, F. De Lillo, N. De Lillo, W. Del Pozzo, L. M. DeMarchi, F. De Matteis, V. D’Emilio, N. Demos, T. Dent, A. Depasse, R. De Pietri, R. De Rosa, C. De Rossi, R. De-Salvo, R. De Simone, S. Dhurandhar, M. C. Díaz, J. Diaz-Ortiz, M., N. A. Didio, T. Dietrich, L. Di Fiore, C. Di Fronzo, C. Di Giorgio, F. Di Giovanni, M. Di Giovanni, T. Di Girolamo, A. Di Lieto, B. Ding, S. Di Pace, I. Di Palma, F. Di Renzo, A. K. Divakarla, A. Dmitriev, Z. Doctor, L. D’Onofrio, F. Donovan, K. L. Dooley, S. Doravari, I. Dorrington, M. Drago, J. C. Driggers, Y. Drori, J. G. Ducoin, P. Dupej, O. Durante, D. D’Urso, P. A. Duverne, S. E. Dwyer, C. Eassa, P. J. Easter, M. Ebersold, T. Eckhardt, G. Eddolls, B. Edelman, T. B. Edo, O. Edy, A. E ffl er, S. Eguchi, J. Eichholz, S. S. Eikenberry, M. Eisenmann, R. A. Eisenstein, A. Ejlli, E. Engelby, Y. Enomoto, L. Errico, R. C. Essick, H. Estellés, D. Estevez, Z. Etienne, T. Etzel, M. Evans, T. M. Evans, B. E. Ewing, V. Fafone, H. Fair, S. Fairhurst, A. M. Farah, S. Farinon, B. Farr, W. M. Farr, N. W. Farrow, 43 E. J. Fauchon-Jones, G. Favaro, M. Favata, M. Fays, M. Fazio, J. Feicht, M. M. Fejer, E. Fenyvesi, D. L. Ferguson, A. Fernandez-Galiana, I. Ferrante, T. A. Ferreira, F. Fidecaro, P. Figura, I. Fiori, M. Fishbach, R. P. Fisher, R. Fittipaldi, V. Fiumara, R. Flaminio, E. Floden, H. Fong, J. A. Font, B. Fornal, P. W. F. Forsyth, A. Franke, S. Frasca, F. Frasconi, C. Freder-ick, J. P. Freed, Z. Frei, A. Freise, R. Frey, P. Fritschel, V. V. Frolov, G. G. Fronzé, Y. Fujii, Y. Fujikawa, M. Fukunaga, M. Fukushima, P. Fulda, M. Fy ff e, H. A. Gabbard, W. E. Gabella, B. U. Gadre, J. R. Gair, J. Gais, S. Galaudage, R. Gamba, D. Ganapathy, A. Gan-guly, D. Gao, S. G. Gaonkar, B. Garaventa, F. García, C. García-Núñez, C. García-Quirós, F. Garufi, B. Gateley, S. Gaudio, V. Gayathri, G. G. Ge, G. Gemme, A. Gennai, J. George, R. N. George, O. Gerberding, L. Gergely, P. Gewecke, S. Ghonge, A. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, B. Giacomazzo, L. Gi-acoppo, J. A. Giaime, K. D. Giardina, D. R. Gibson, C. Gier, M. Giesler, P. Giri, F. Gissi, J. Glanzer, A. E. Gleckl, P. Godwin, E. Goetz, R. Goetz, N. Gohlke, J. Golomb, B. Goncharov, G. González, A. Gopakumar, M. Gosselin, R. Gouaty, D. W. Gould, B. Grace, A. Grado, M. Granata, V. Granata, A. Grant, S. Gras, P. Grassia, C. Gray, R. Gray, G. Greco, A. C. Green, R. Green, A. M. Gretarsson, E. M. Gretarsson, D. Gri ffi th, W. Gri ffi ths, H. L. Griggs, G. Grignani, A. Grimaldi, S. J. Grimm, H. Grote, S. Grunewald, P. Gruning, D. Guerra, G. M. Guidi, A. R. Guimaraes, G. Guixé, H. K. Gulati, H. K. Guo, Y. Guo, A. Gupta, A. Gupta, P. Gupta, E. K. Gustafson, R. Gustafson, F. Guz-man, S. Ha, L. Haegel, A. Hagiwara, S. Haino, O. Halim, E. D. Hall, E. Z. Hamilton, G. Ham-mond, W. B. Han, M. Haney, J. Hanks, C. Hanna, M. D. Hannam, O. Hannuksela, H. Hansen, T. J. Hansen, J. Hanson, T. Harder, T. Hardwick, K. Haris, J. Harms, G. M. Harry, I. W. Harry, D. Hartwig, K. Hasegawa, B. Haskell, R. K. Hasskew, C. J. Haster, K. Hattori, K. Haugh-ian, H. Hayakawa, K. Hayama, F. J. Hayes, J. Healy, A. Heidmann, A. Heidt, M. C. Heintze, J. Heinze, J. Heinzel, H. Heitmann, F. Hellman, P. Hello, A. F. Helmling-Cornell, G. Hemming, M. Hendry, I. S. Heng, E. Hennes, J. Hennig, M. H. Hennig, A. G. Hernandez, F. Hernandez Vivanco, M. Heurs, S. Hild, P. Hill, Y. Himem-oto, A. S. Hines, Y. Hiranuma, N. Hirata, E. Hirose, S. Hochheim, D. Hofman, J. N. Hohmann, D. G. Holcomb, N. A. Holland, K. Holley-Bockelmann, I. J. Hollows, Z. J. Holmes, K. Holt, D. E. Holz, Z. Hong, P. Hop-kins, J. Hough, S. Hourihane, E. J. Howell, C. G. Hoy, D. Hoyland, A. Hreibi, B.-H. Hsieh, Y. Hsu, G.-Z. Huang, H.-Y. Huang, P. Huang, Y.-C. Huang, Y. J. Huang, Y. Huang, M. T. Hübner, A. D. Huddart, B. Hughey, D. C. Y. Hui, V. Hui, S. Husa, S. H. Huttner, R. Huxford, T. Huynh-Dinh, S. Ide, B. Idzkowski, A. Iess, B. Ikenoue, S. Imam, K. Inayoshi, C. Ingram, Y. Inoue, K. Ioka, M. Isi, K. Isleif, K. Ito, Y. Itoh, B. R. Iyer, K. Izumi, V. JaberianHamedan, T. Jacqmin, S. J. Jadhav, S. P. Jadhav, A. L. James, A. Z. Jan, K. Jani, J. Janquart, K. Janssens, N. N. Janthalur, P. Jaranowski, D. Jariwala, R. Jaume, A. C. Jenk-ins, K. Jenner, C. Jeon, M. Jeunon, W. Jia, H. B. Jin, G. R. Johns, N. K. Johnson-McDaniel, A. W. Jones, D. I. Jones, J. D. Jones, P. Jones, R. Jones, R. J. G. Jonker, L. Ju, P. Jung, K. Jung, J. Junker, V. Juste, K. Kaihotsu, T. Kajita, M. Kakizaki, C. V. Kalaghatgi, V. Kalogera, B. Kamai, M. Kamiizumi, N. Kanda, S. Kandhasamy, G. Kang, J. B. Kanner, Y. Kao, S. J. Kapadia, D. P. Kapasi, S. Karat, C. Karathanasis, S. Karki, R. Kashyap, M. Kasprzack, W. Kastaun, S. Katsanevas, E. Katsavounidis, W. Katzman, T. Kaur, K. Kawabe, K. Kawaguchi, N. Kawai, T. Kawasaki, F. Kéfélian, D. Keitel, J. S. Key, S. Khadka, F. Y. Khalili, S. Khan, E. A. Khaz-anov, N. Khetan, M. Khursheed, N. Kijbunchoo, C. Kim, J. C. Kim, J. Kim, K. Kim, W. S. Kim, Y. M. Kim, C. Kimball, N. Kimura, M. Kinley-Hanlon, R. Kirchho ff , J. S. Kissel, N. Kita, H. Kitazawa, L. Kleybolte, S. Klimenko, A. M. Knee, T. D. Knowles, E. Knyazev, P. Koch, G. Koekoek, Y. Kojima, K. Kokeyama, S. Koley, P. Kolitsidou, M. Kolstein, K. Komori, V. Kon-drashov, A. K. H. Kong, A. Kontos, N. Koper, M. Korobko, K. Kotake, M. Kovalam, D. B. Kozak, C. Kozakai, R. Kozu, V. Kringel, N. V. Krishnendu, A. Królak, G. Kuehn, F. Kuei, P. Kuijer, S. Kulkarni, A. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Kumar, R. Kumar, J. Kume, K. Kuns, C. Kuo, H.-S. Kuo, Y. Kuromiya, S. Kuroy-anagi, K. Kusayanagi, S. Kuwahara, K. Kwak, P. Lagabbe, D. Laghi, E. Lalande, T. L. Lam, A. Lamberts, M. Landry, B. B. Lane, R. N. Lang, J. Lange, B. Lantz, I. La Rosa, A. Lartaux-Vollard, P. D. Lasky, M. Laxen, A. Lazzarini, C. Lazzaro, P. Leaci, S. Leavey, Y. K. Lecoeuche, 44 H. K. Lee, H. M. Lee, H. W. Lee, J. Lee, K. Lee, R. Lee, J. Lehmann, A. Lemaître, M. Leonardi, N. Leroy, N. Letendre, C. Levesque, Y. Levin, J. N. Leviton, K. Leyde, A. K. Y. Li, B. Li, J. Li, K. L. Li, T. G. F. Li, X. Li, C.-Y. Lin, F.-K. Lin, F.-L. Lin, H. L. Lin, L. C. C. Lin, F. Linde, S. D. Linker, J. N. Linley, T. B. Littenberg, G. C. Liu, J. Liu, K. Liu, X. Liu, F. Llamas, M. Llorens-Monteagudo, R. K. L. Lo, A. Lockwood, M. Loh, L. T. London, A. Longo, D. Lopez, M. Lopez Portilla, M. Lorenzini, V. Loriette, M. Lormand, G. Losurdo, T. P. Lott, J. D. Lough, C. O. Lousto, G. Lovelace, J. F. Lucaccioni, H. Lück, D. Lumaca, A. P. Lundgren, L. W. Luo, J. E. Lynam, R. Macas, M. MacInnis, D. M. Macleod, I. A. O. MacMillan, A. Macquet, I. Magaña Hernandez, C. Magazzù, R. M. Magee, R. Mag-giore, M. Magnozzi, S. Mahesh, E. Majorana, C. Makarem, I. Maksimovic, S. Maliakal, A. Malik, N. Man, V. Mandic, V. Mangano, J. L. Mango, G. L. Mansell, M. Manske, M. Manto-vani, M. Mapelli, F. Marchesoni, M. Marchio, F. Marion, Z. Mark, S. Márka, Z. Márka, C. Markakis, A. S. Markosyan, A. Markowitz, E. Maros, A. Marquina, S. Marsat, F. Martelli, I. W. Martin, R. M. Martin, M. Martinez, V. A. Martinez, V. Martinez, K. Martinovic, D. V. Martynov, E. J. Marx, H. Masalehdan, K. Mason, E. Massera, A. Masserot, T. J. Massinger, M. Masso-Reid, S. Mastrogiovanni, A. Matas, M. Mateu-Lucena, F. Matichard, M. Matiushechkina, N. Mavalvala, J. J. McCann, R. McCarthy, D. E. McClelland, P. K. McClincy, S. McCormick, L. McCuller, G. I. McGhee, S. C. McGuire, C. McIsaac, J. McIver, T. McRae, S. T. McWilliams, D. Meacher, M. Mehmet, A. K. Mehta, Q. Meijer, A. Melatos, D. A. Melchor, G. Mendell, A. Menendez-Vazquez, C. S. Menoni, R. A. Mercer, L. Mereni, K. Mer-feld, E. L. Merilh, J. D. Merritt, M. Merzougui, S. Meshkov, C. Messenger, C. Messick, P. M. Meyers, F. Meylahn, A. Mhaske, A. Mi-ani, H. Miao, I. Michaloliakos, C. Michel, Y. Michimura, H. Middleton, L. Milano, A. L. Miller, A. Miller, B. Miller, M. Millhouse, J. C. Mills, E. Milotti, O. Minazzoli, Y. Minenkov, N. Mio, L. M. Mir, M. Miravet-Tenés, C. Mishra, T. Mishra, T. Mistry, S. Mitra, V. P. Mitrofanov, G. Mitselmakher, R. Mittleman, O. Miyakawa, A. Miyamoto, Y. Miyazaki, K. Miyo, S. Miyoki, G. Mo, L. M. Moda ff eri, E. Moguel, K. Mogushi, S. R. P. Mohapatra, S. R. Mohite, I. Molina, M. Molina-Ruiz, M. Mondin, M. Montani, C. J. Moore, D. Moraru, F. Morawski, A. More, C. Moreno, G. Moreno, Y. Mori, S. Morisaki, Y. Moriwaki, G. Morrás, B. Mours, C. M. Mow-Lowry, S. Mozzon, F. Muciaccia, A. Mukherjee, D. Mukherjee, S. Mukher-jee, S. Mukherjee, S. Mukherjee, N. Mukund, A. Mullavey, J. Munch, E. A. Muñiz, P. G. Murray, R. Musenich, S. Muusse, S. L. Nadji, K. Nagano, S. Nagano, A. Nagar, K. Naka-mura, H. Nakano, M. Nakano, R. Nakashima, Y. Nakayama, V. Napolano, I. Nardecchia, T. Narikawa, L. Naticchioni, B. Nayak, R. K. Nayak, R. Negishi, B. F. Neil, J. Neilson, G. Nelemans, T. J. N. Nelson, M. Nery, P. Neubauer, A. Neunzert, K. Y. Ng, S. W. S. Ng, C. Nguyen, P. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, L. Nguyen Quynh, W. T. Ni, S. A. Nichols, A. Nishizawa, S. Nissanke, E. Nitoglia, F. Nocera, M. Norman, C. North, S. Nozaki, J. F. Nuño Siles, L. K. Nuttall, J. Oberling, B. D. O’Brien, Y. Obuchi, J. O’Dell, E. Oelker, W. Ogaki, G. Oganesyan, J. J. Oh, K. Oh, S. H. Oh, M. Ohashi, N. Ohishi, M. Ohkawa, F. Ohme, H. Ohta, M. A. Okada, Y. Okutani, K. Okutomi, C. Olivetto, K. Oohara, C. Ooi, R. Oram, B. O’Reilly, R. G. Ormiston, N. D. Ormsby, L. F. Ortega, R. O’Shaughnessy, E. O’Shea, S. Oshino, S. Ossokine, C. Osthelder, S. Otabe, D. J. Ottaway, H. Overmier, A. E. Pace, G. Pagano, M. A. Page, G. Pagliaroli, A. Pai, S. A. Pai, J. R. Palamos, O. Palashov, C. Palomba, H. Pan, K. Pan, P. K. Panda, H. Pang, P. T. H. Pang, C. Pankow, F. Pan-narale, B. C. Pant, F. H. Panther, F. Paoletti, A. Paoli, A. Paolone, A. Parisi, H. Park, J. Park, W. Parker, D. Pascucci, A. Pasqualetti, R. Pas-saquieti, D. Passuello, M. Patel, M. Pathak, B. Patricelli, A. S. Patron, S. Paul, E. Payne, M. Pedraza, M. Pegoraro, A. Pele, F. E. Peña Arellano, S. Penn, A. Perego, A. Pereira, T. Pereira, C. J. Perez, C. Périgois, C. C. Perkins, A. Perreca, S. Perriès, J. Petermann, D. Petter-son, H. P. Pfei ff er, K. A. Pham, K. S. Phukon, O. J. Piccinni, M. Pichot, M. Piendibene, F. Piergiovanni, L. Pierini, V. Pierro, G. Pil-lant, M. Pillas, F. Pilo, L. Pinard, I. M. Pinto, M. Pinto, B. Piotrzkowski, K. Piotrzkowski, M. Pirello, M. D. Pitkin, E. Placidi, L. Planas, W. Plastino, C. Pluchar, R. Poggiani, E. Polini, D. Y. T. Pong, S. Ponrathnam, P. Popolizio, E. K. Porter, R. Poulton, J. Powell, M. Prac-chia, T. Pradier, A. K. Prajapati, K. Prasai, 45 R. Prasanna, G. Pratten, M. Principe, G. A. Prodi, L. Prokhorov, P. Prosposito, L. Prudenzi, A. Puecher, M. Punturo, F. Puosi, P. Puppo, M. Pürrer, H. Qi, V. Quetschke, R. Quitzow-James, N. Qutob, F. J. Raab, G. Raaijmakers, H. Radkins, N. Radulesco, P. Ra ff ai, S. X. Rail, S. Raja, C. Rajan, K. E. Ramirez, T. D. Ramirez, A. Ramos-Buades, J. Rana, P. Rapagnani, U. D. Rapol, A. Ray, V. Raymond, N. Raza, M. Raz-zano, J. Read, L. A. Rees, T. Regimbau, L. Rei, S. Reid, S. W. Reid, D. H. Reitze, P. Relton, A. Renzini, P. Rettegno, A. Reza, M. Rezac, F. Ricci, D. Richards, J. W. Richardson, L. Richardson, G. Riemenschneider, K. Riles, S. Rinaldi, K. Rink, M. Rizzo, N. A. Robertson, R. Robie, F. Robinet, A. Rocchi, S. Rodriguez, L. Rolland, J. G. Rollins, M. Romanelli, R. Ro-mano, C. L. Romel, A. Romero-Rodríguez, I. M. Romero-Shaw, J. H. Romie, S. Ronchini, L. Rosa, C. A. Rose, D. Rosi´ nska, M. P. Ross, S. Rowan, S. J. Rowlinson, S. Roy, S. Roy, S. Roy, D. Rozza, P. Ruggi, K. Ruiz-Rocha, K. Ryan, S. Sachdev, T. Sadecki, J. Sadiq, N. Sago, S. Saito, Y. Saito, K. Sakai, Y. Sakai, M. Sakellariadou, Y. Sakuno, O. S. Salafia, L. Salconi, M. Saleem, F. Salemi, A. Samajdar, E. J. Sanchez, J. H. Sanchez, L. E. Sanchez, N. Sanchis-Gual, J. R. Sanders, A. Sanuy, T. R. Saravanan, N. Sarin, B. Sassolas, H. Satari, B. S. Sathyaprakash, S. Sato, T. Sato, O. Sauter, R. L. Savage, T. Sawada, D. Sawant, H. L. Sawant, S. Sayah, D. Schaetzl, M. Scheel, J. Scheuer, M. Schiworski, P. Schmidt, S. Schmidt, R. Schn-abel, M. Schneewind, R. M. S. Schofield, A. Schönbeck, B. W. Schulte, B. F. Schutz, E. Schwartz, J. Scott, S. M. Scott, M. Seglar-Arroyo, T. Sekiguchi, Y. Sekiguchi, D. Sellers, A. S. Sengupta, D. Sentenac, E. G. Seo, V. Se-quino, A. Sergeev, Y. Setyawati, T. Sha ff er, M. S. Shahriar, B. Shams, L. Shao, A. Sharma, P. Sharma, P. Shawhan, N. S. Shcheblanov, S. Shibagaki, M. Shikauchi, R. Shimizu, T. Shi-moda, K. Shimode, H. Shinkai, T. Shishido, A. Shoda, D. H. Shoemaker, D. M. Shoemaker, S. ShyamSundar, M. Sieniawska, D. Sigg, L. P. Singer, D. Singh, N. Singh, A. Singha, A. M. Sintes, V. Sipala, V. Skliris, B. J. J. Slagmolen, T. J. Slaven-Blair, J. Smetana, J. R. Smith, R. J. E. Smith, J. Soldateschi, S. N. Somala, K. Somiya, E. J. Son, K. Soni, S. Soni, V. Sor-dini, F. Sorrentino, N. Sorrentino, H. Sotani, R. Soulard, T. Souradeep, E. Sowell, V. Spag-nuolo, A. P. Spencer, M. Spera, R. Srinivasan, A. K. Srivastava, V. Srivastava, K. Staats, C. Stachie, D. A. Steer, J. Steinho ff , J. Steinlech-ner, S. Steinlechner, S. P. Stevenson, D. J. Stops, M. Stover, K. A. Strain, L. C. Strang, G. Stratta, A. Strunk, R. Sturani, A. L. Stuver, S. Sudhagar, V. Sudhir, R. Sugimoto, H. G. Suh, A. G. Sullivan, J. M. Sullivan, T. Z. Summerscales, H. Sun, L. Sun, S. Sunil, A. Sur, J. Suresh, P. J. Sutton, T. Suzuki, T. Suzuki, B. L. Swinkels, M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, P. Szewczyk, M. Tacca, H. Tagoshi, S. C. Tait, H. Takahashi, R. Taka-hashi, A. Takamori, S. Takano, H. Takeda, M. Takeda, C. J. Talbot, C. Talbot, H. Tanaka, K. Tanaka, K. Tanaka, T. Tanaka, T. Tanaka, A. J. Tanasijczuk, S. Tanioka, D. B. Tanner, D. Tao, L. Tao, E. N. Tapia San Martín, C. Taranto, J. D. Tasson, S. Telada, R. Tenorio, J. E. Terhune, L. Terkowski, M. P. Thirugnanasambandam, L. Thomas, M. Thomas, P. Thomas, J. E. Thompson, S. R. Thondapu, K. A. Thorne, E. Thrane, S. Tiwari, S. Tiwari, V. Tiwari, A. M. Toivonen, K. Toland, A. E. Tolley, T. Tomaru, Y. Tomigami, T. Tomura, M. Tonelli, A. Torres-Forné, C. I. Torrie, I. Tosta e Melo, D. Töyrä, A. Trapananti, F. Travasso, G. Tray-lor, M. Trevor, M. C. Tringali, A. Tripathee, L. Troiano, A. Trovato, L. Trozzo, R. J. Trudeau, D. S. Tsai, D. Tsai, K. W. Tsang, T. Tsang, J.-S. Tsao, M. Tse, R. Tso, K. Tsubono, S. Tsuchida, L. Tsukada, D. Tsuna, T. Tsutsui, T. Tsuzuki, K. Turbang, M. Turconi, D. Tuyenbayev, A. S. Ubhi, N. Uchikata, T. Uchiyama, R. P. Udall, A. Ueda, T. Uehara, K. Ueno, G. Ueshima, C. S. Unnikrishnan, F. Uraguchi, A. L. Urban, T. Ushiba, A. Utina, H. Vahlbruch, G. Vajente, A. Vajpeyi, G. Valdes, M. Valentini, V. Valsan, N. van Bakel, M. van Beuzekom, J. F. J. van den Brand, C. Van Den Broeck, D. C. Vander-Hyde, L. van der Schaaf, J. V. van Heijningen, J. Vanosky, M. H. P. M. van Putten, N. van Remortel, M. Vardaro, A. F. Vargas, V. Varma, M. Vasúth, A. Vecchio, G. Vedovato, J. Veitch, P. J. Veitch, J. Venneberg, G. Venugopalan, D. Verkindt, P. Verma, Y. Verma, D. Veske, F. Vetrano, A. Viceré, S. Vidyant, A. D. Viets, A. Vijaykumar, V. Villa-Ortega, J. Y. Vinet, A. Virtuoso, S. Vitale, T. Vo, H. Vocca, E. R. G. von Reis, J. S. A. von Wrangel, C. Vorvick, S. P. Vyatchanin, L. E. Wade, M. Wade, K. J. Wagner, R. C. Walet, M. Walker, G. S. Wallace, L. Wallace, S. Walsh, J. Wang, J. Z. Wang, 46 W. H. Wang, R. L. Ward, J. Warner, M. Was, T. Washimi, N. Y. Washington, J. Watchi, B. Weaver, S. A. Webster, M. Weinert, A. J. Weinstein, R. Weiss, C. M. Weller, R. A. Weller, F. Wellmann, L. Wen, P. Weßels, K. Wette, J. T. Whelan, D. D. White, B. F. Whiting, C. Whit-tle, D. Wilken, D. Williams, M. J. Williams, N. Williams, A. R. Williamson, J. L. Willis, B. Willke, D. J. Wilson, W. Winkler, C. C. Wipf, T. Wlodarczyk, G. Woan, J. Woehler, J. K. Wo ff ord, I. C. F. Wong, C. Wu, D. S. Wu, H. Wu, S. Wu, D. M. Wysocki, L. Xiao, W.-R. Xu, T. Yamada, H. Yamamoto, K. Yamamoto, K. Yamamoto, T. Yamamoto, K. Yamashita, R. Yamazaki, F. W. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, M. J. Yap, D. W. Yeeles, A. B. Yelikar, M. Ying, K. Yokogawa, J. Yokoyama, T. Yokozawa, J. Yoo, T. Yoshioka, H. Yu, H. Yu, H. Yuzurihara, A. Zadro˙ zny, M. Zanolin, S. Zeidler, T. Zelenova, J. P. Zendri, M. Zevin, M. Zhan, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, G. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng, R. Zhou, Z. Zhou, X. J. Zhu, Z. H. Zhu, A. B. Zimmerman, Y. Zlo-chower, M. E. Zucker, J. Zweizig, GWTC-3: Compact Binary Coalescences Observed by LIGO and Virgo During the Second Part of the Third Observing Run, arXiv e-prints (2021) arXiv:2111.03606 arXiv:2111.03606 .[108] S. Banagiri, C. P. L. Berry, G. S. C. Davies, L. Tsukada, Z. Doctor, Unified pastro for gravitational waves: Consistently combining information from multiple search pipelines, Phys. Rev. D108 (8) (2023) 083043. arXiv: 2305.00071 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108. 083043 .[109] S. S. Chaudhary, A. Toivonen, G. Waratkar, G. Mo, D. Chatterjee, S. Antier, P. Brockill, M. W. Coughlin, R. Essick, S. Ghosh, S. Morisaki, P. Baral, A. Baylor, N. Ad-hikari, P. Brady, G. C. Davies, T. D. Canton, M. Cavaglia, J. Creighton, S. Choudhary, Y.-K. Chu, P. Clearwater, L. Davis, T. Dent, M. Drago, B. Ewing, P. Godwin, W. Guo, C. Hanna, R. Huxford, I. Harry, E. Katsavouni-dis, M. Kovalam, A. K. Li, R. Magee, E. Marx, D. Meacher, C. Messick, X. Morice-Atkinson, A. Pace, R. D. Pietri, B. Piotrzkowski, S. Roy, S. Sachdev, L. P. Singer, D. Singh, M. Szczep-anczyk, D. Tang, M. Trevor, L. Tsukada, V. Villa-Ortega, L. Wen, D. Wysocki, Low-latency gravitational wave alert products and their performance at the time of the fourth ligo-virgo-kagra observing run, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121 (18) (2024) e2316474121. arXiv:https://www.pnas. org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.2316474121 ,

doi:10.1073/pnas.2316474121 .URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10. 1073/pnas.2316474121 

[110] I. P. A. U. Guide, Alert contents, emfollow. docs.ligo.org/userguide/content.html ,accessed: May 28, 2026 (2026). [111] D. Chatterjee, S. Ghosh, P. R. Brady, S. J. Kapadia, A. L. Miller, S. Nissanke, F. Pannarale, A machine learning-based source property inference for compact binary mergers, The Astrophysical Journal 896 (1) (2020) 54. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab8dbe .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab8dbe 

[112] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Ac-ernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, et al., Open data from the first and second observing runs of Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo, Soft-wareX 13 (2021) 100658. arXiv:1912.11716 ,

doi:10.1016/j.softx.2021.100658 .[113] B. Zackay, T. Venumadhav, L. Dai, J. Roulet, M. Zaldarriaga, Highly spinning and aligned bi-nary black hole merger in the Advanced LIGO first observing run, Phys. Rev. D100 (2) (2019) 023007. arXiv:1902.10331 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.100.023007 .[114] B. P. Abbott, et al., Gwtc-1: A gravitational-wave transient catalog of compact binary merg-ers observed by ligo and virgo during the first and second observing runs, Phys. Rev. X 9 (2019) 031040. doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.9.031040 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevX.9.031040 

[115] A. H. Nitz, C. Capano, A. B. Nielsen, S. Reyes, R. White, D. A. Brown, B. Krishnan, 1-OGC: The First Open Gravitational-wave Cat-alog of Binary Mergers from Analysis of Pub-lic Advanced LIGO Data, ApJ872 (2) (2019) 195. arXiv:1811.01921 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab0108 .47 [116] A. H. Nitz, T. Dent, G. S. Davies, S. Kumar, C. D. Capano, I. Harry, S. Mozzon, L. Nut-tall, A. Lundgren, M. Tápai, 2-OGC: Open gravitational-wave catalog of binary mergers from analysis of public advanced LIGO and virgo data, The Astrophysical Journal 891 (2) (2020) 123. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab733f .URL https://doi.org/10.3847% 2F1538-4357%2Fab733f 

[117] A. H. Nitz, C. D. Capano, S. Kumar, Y.-F. Wang, S. Kastha, M. Schäfer, R. Dhurkunde, M. Cabero, 3-OGC: Catalog of Gravita-tional Waves from Compact-binary Mergers, ApJ922 (1) (2021) 76. arXiv:2105.09151 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac1c03 .[118] A. H. Nitz, S. Kumar, Y.-F. Wang, S. Kastha, S. Wu, M. Schäfer, R. Dhurkunde, C. D. Ca-pano, 4-OGC: Catalog of Gravitational Waves from Compact Binary Mergers, ApJ946 (2) (2023) 59. arXiv:2112.06878 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/aca591 .[119] R. Lynch, S. Vitale, R. Essick, E. Katsavouni-dis, F. Robinet, Information-theoretic approach to the gravitational-wave burst detection prob-lem, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017) 104046. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.95.104046 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.95.104046 

[120] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, et al., Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black-hole Merger GW150914, Astrophys. J. Lett 818 (2016) L22. arXiv:1602.03846 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22 .[121] J. J. Eldridge, E. R. Stanway, BPASS predictions for binary black hole mergers, MNRAS462 (3) (2016) 3302–3313. arXiv:1602.03790 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1772 .[122] J. J. Andrews, J. Cronin, V. Kalogera, C. P. L. Berry, A. Zezas, Targeted Mod-eling of GW150914’s Binary Black Hole Source with Dart_board, ApJL914 (2) (2021) L32. arXiv:2011.13918 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac00a6 .[123] C. L. Rodriguez, C.-J. Haster, S. Chatterjee, V. Kalogera, F. A. Rasio, Dynamical Forma-tion of the GW150914 Binary Black Hole, ApJL824 (1) (2016) L8. arXiv:1604.04254 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8205/824/1/L8 .[124] D. Gerosa, M. Fishbach, Hierarchical mergers of stellar-mass black holes and their gravitational-wave signatures, Nature Astronomy 5 (2021) 749–760. arXiv:2105.03439 , doi:10.1038/ s41550-021-01398-w .[125] I. Mandel, W. M. Farr, J. R. Gair, Extracting dis-tribution parameters from multiple uncertain ob-servations with selection biases, MNRAS486 (1) (2019) 1086–1093. arXiv:1809.02063 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz896 .[126] R. Essick, M. W. Coughlin, M. Zevin, D. Chat-terjee, T. A. Clarke, S. Colloms, U. Mali, S. Miller, N. Steinle, P. Baral, A. C. Baylor, G. Cabourn Davies, T. Dent, P. Joshi, P. Kumar, C. Messick, T. Mishra, A. Ouzriat, K. S. Phukon, L. Piccari, M. Pillas, M. Trevor, T. A. Callister, M. Fishbach, Compact binary coalescence sensi-tivity estimates with injection campaigns during the ligo-virgo-kagra collaborations’ fourth ob-serving run, Phys. Rev. D 112 (2025) 102001. 

doi:10.1103/44x3-hv3y .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ 44x3-hv3y 

[127] V. Tiwari, Estimation of the sensitive volume for gravitational-wave source populations using weighted monte carlo integration, Classical and Quantum Gravity 35 (14) (2018) 145009. 

doi:10.1088/1361-6382/aac89d .URL https://doi.org/10.1088/ 1361-6382/aac89d 

[128] W. M. Farr, Accuracy Requirements for Empirically-Measured Selection Func-tions, Research Notes of the AAS 3 (5) (2019) 66. arXiv:1904.10879 ,

doi:10.3847/2515-5172/ab1d5f .[129] R. Essick, Constructing mixture models for sen-sitivity estimates from subsets of separate injec-tions, Research Notes of the AAS 5 (10) (2021) 220. doi:10.3847/2515-5172/ac2ba7 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 2515-5172/ac2ba7 

[130] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, 48 N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, C. C. Arceneaux, J. S. Areeda, N. Ar-naud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, S. Babak, P. Bacon, M. K. M. Bader, P. T. Baker, F. Baldaccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsug-lia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, C. Baune, V. Bavigadda, M. Bazzan, M. Bejger, A. S. Bell, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhan-dare, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, J. Birch, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, C. Biwer, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, C. Bogan, A. Bohe, C. Bond, F. Bondu, R. Bon-nand, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, V. B. Braginsky, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, V. Bris-son, P. Brockill, J. E. Broida, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, D. D. Brown, N. M. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, T. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, K. C. Can-non, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Car-bognani, S. Caride, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casen-tini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, L. Cerboni Ba-iardi, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, S. J. Chamberlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chassande-Mottin, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Cheng, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, S. Chua, S. Chung, G. Ciani, F. Clara, J. A. Clark, F. Cleva, E. Coccia, P.-F. Cohadon, A. Colla, C. G. Collette, L. Cominsky, M. Con-stancio, A. Conte, L. Conti, D. Cook, T. R. Cor-bitt, N. Cornish, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, M. W. Coughlin, S. B. Coughlin, J.-P. Coulon, S. T. Countryman, P. Couvares, E. E. Cowan, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, K. Craig, J. D. E. Creighton, J. Cripe, S. G. Crowder, A. Cumming, Binary Black Hole Mergers in the First Advanced LIGO Observing Run, Physical Review X 6 (4) (2016) 041015. arXiv:1606.04856 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevX.6.041015 .[131] J. Abadie, B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, M. Aber-nathy, T. Accadia, F. Acernese, C. Adams, R. Adhikari, P. Ajith, B. Allen, et al., TOP-ICAL REVIEW: Predictions for the rates of compact binary coalescences observable by ground-based gravitational-wave detectors, Clas-sical and Quantum Gravity 27 (17) (2010) 173001. arXiv:1003.2480 , doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/27/17/173001 .[132] C. Talbot, E. Thrane, Determining the population properties of spinning black holes, Phys. Rev. D 96 (2017) 023012. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 96.023012 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.96.023012 

[133] M. Fishbach, D. E. Holz, W. M. Farr, Does the black hole merger rate evolve with redshift?, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 863 (2) (2018) L41. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aad800 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/ 2041-8213/aad800 

[134] D. Wysocki, J. Lange, R. O’Shaughnessy, Reconstructing phenomenological distributions of compact binaries via gravitational wave observations, Phys. Rev. D100 (4) (2019) 043012. arXiv:1805.06442 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.100.043012 .[135] V. Tiwari, S. Fairhurst, The Emergence of Struc-ture in the Binary Black Hole Mass Distribution, ApJL913 (2) (2021) L19. arXiv:2011.04502 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/abfbe7 .[136] B. Edelman, Z. Doctor, J. Godfrey, B. Farr, Ain’t No Mountain High Enough: Semipara-metric Modeling of LIGO-Virgo’s Binary Black Hole Mass Distribution, ApJ924 (2) (2022) 101. arXiv:2109.06137 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ac3667 .[137] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adams, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, P. F. de Alarcón, S. Akcay, S. Albanesi, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, C. Anand, S. Anand, 49 A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. Andres, T. Andri´ c, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, F. Antonini, S. Appert, K. Arai, K. Arai, Y. Arai, S. Araki, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Aritomi, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. M. As-ton, P. Astone, F. Aubin, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Badger, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, L. Baiotti, J. Baird, R. Bajpai, M. Ball, G. Bal-lardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbi-eri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beni-wal, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. Benyaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, R. Birney, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, M. Boldrini, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bram-ley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. Brandt, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, T. Bulik, H. J. Bul-ten, A. Buonanno, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. Cameron, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, S. Canevarolo, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, Z. Cao, E. Capocasa, E. Capote, G. Carapella, Population of Merg-ing Compact Binaries Inferred Using Gravita-tional Waves through GWTC-3, Physical Review X 13 (1) (2023) 011048. arXiv:2111.03634 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.13.011048 .[138] A. Burrows, T. Wang, D. Vartanyan, Channels of Stellar-mass Black Hole Formation, ApJ987 (2) (2025) 164. arXiv:2412.07831 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/addd04 .[139] M. Dominik, E. Berti, R. O’Shaughnessy, I. Mandel, K. Belczynski, C. Fryer, D. E. Holz, T. Bulik, F. Pannarale, Double Compact Ob-jects III: Gravitational-wave Detection Rates, ApJ806 (2) (2015) 263. arXiv:1405.7016 ,

doi:10.1088/0004-637X/806/2/263 .[140] K. Belczynski, J. Klencki, C. E. Fields, A. Ole-jak, E. Berti, G. Meynet, C. L. Fryer, D. E. Holz, R. O’Shaughnessy, D. A. Brown, T. Bulik, S. C. Leung, K. Nomoto, P. Madau, R. Hirschi, E. Kaiser, S. Jones, S. Mondal, M. Chruslin-ska, P. Drozda, D. Gerosa, Z. Doctor, M. Giersz, S. Ekstrom, C. Georgy, A. Askar, V. Baibhav, D. Wysocki, T. Natan, W. M. Farr, G. Wik-torowicz, M. Coleman Miller, B. Farr, J.-P. La-sota, Evolutionary roads leading to low e ff ective spins, high black hole masses, and O1 /O2 rates for LIGO /Virgo binary black holes, A&A636 (2020) A104. arXiv:1706.07053 , doi:10. 1051/0004-6361/201936528 .[141] K. Belczynski, V. Kalogera, T. Bulik, A Com-prehensive Study of Binary Compact Objects as Gravitational Wave Sources: Evolutionary Chan-nels, Rates, and Physical Properties, ApJ572 (1) (2002) 407–431. arXiv:astro-ph/0111452 ,

doi:10.1086/340304 .[142] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, A. Adams, C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, Y. Asali, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, P. Aufmuth, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, V. Avendano, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, J. Baird, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Bals, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, R. S. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, S. Bar-num, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Bar-suglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, 50 A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Baz-zan, B. R. Becher, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, D. Beniwal, M. G. Ben-jamin, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, R. Bhandare, A. V. Bhandari, D. Bhattachar-jee, J. Bidler, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, O. Blanch, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, Y. Boetzel, G. Bo-gaert, M. Boldrini, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bon-nand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bram-ley, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, F. Brighenti, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bul-ten, A. Buonanno, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, M. Cae-sar, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Cal-loni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, K. C. Can-non, H. Cao, J. Cao, G. Carapella, F. Carbog-nani, M. F. Carney, M. Carpinelli, G. Carullo, T. L. Carver, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, P. Cerdá-Durán, E. Cesarini, W. Chaibi, K. Chakravarti, C.-L. Chan, C. Chan, K. Chandra, P. Chanial, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. A. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, Population Properties of Compact Objects from the Second LIGO-Virgo Gravitational-Wave Transient Cat-alog, ApJL913 (1) (2021) L7. arXiv:2010. 14533 , doi:10.3847/2041-8213/abe949 .[143] M. Fishbach, D. E. Holz, Picky Partners: The Pairing of Component Masses in Bi-nary Black Hole Mergers, ApJL891 (1) (2020) L27. arXiv:1905.12669 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/ab7247 .[144] C. L. Rodriguez, S. Chatterjee, F. A. Rasio, Binary black hole mergers from globular clus-ters: Masses, merger rates, and the impact of stellar evolution, Phys. Rev. D93 (8) (2016) 084029. arXiv:1602.02444 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.93.084029 .[145] C. L. Rodriguez, M. Zevin, P. Amaro-Seoane, S. Chatterjee, K. Kremer, F. A. Rasio, C. S. Ye, Black holes: The next generation—repeated mergers in dense star clusters and their gravitational-wave properties, Physical Re-view D 100 (4) (2019) 043027. [146] I. Mandel, W. M. Farr, A. Colonna, S. Stevenson, P. Tiˇ no, J. Veitch, Model-independent inference on compact-binary observations, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 465 (3) (2017) 3254–3260. arXiv: 1608.08223 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stw2883 .[147] Y.-J. Li, Y.-Z. Wang, M.-Z. Han, S.-P. Tang, Q. Yuan, Y.-Z. Fan, D.-M. Wei, A Flexible Gaussian Process Reconstruction Method and the Mass Function of the Coalescing Binary Black Hole Systems, Astrophys. J. 917 (1) (2021) 33. arXiv:2104.02969 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ac0971 .[148] A. Ray, I. Magaña Hernandez, S. Mohite, J. Creighton, S. Kapadia, Nonparametric In-ference of the Population of Compact Bina-ries from Gravitational-wave Observations Using Binned Gaussian Processes, Astrophys. J. 957 (1) (2023) 37. arXiv:2304.08046 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/acf452 .[149] S. E. Woosley, A. Heger, The Pair-instability Mass Gap for Black Holes, ApJL912 (2) (2021) L31. arXiv:2103.07933 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/abf2c4 .[150] R. Abbott, et al., Gw190521: A binary black hole merger with a total mass of 150 MJ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 (2020) 101102. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.125.101102 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.125.101102 

[151] A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Ad-hikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Alléné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Altin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, 51 T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, C. A. Alvarez, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. As-siduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Bad-ger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Ba-jpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldicchi, M. Ball, G. Bal-lardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Bar-man, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Barto-letti, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Baz-zan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Be-jger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bel-lie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattachar-jee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, S. Bhag-wat, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boettner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, S. Borhanian, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brockmueller, A. F. Brooks, GW231123: A Binary Black Hole Merger with Total Mass 190–265 M⊙,ApJL993 (1) (2025) L25. arXiv:2507.08219 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ae0c9c .[152] V. De Luca, G. Franciolini, A. Riotto, Gw231123: A possible primordial black hole origin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 136 (2026) 201401. 

doi:10.1103/y4x3-v6j2 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ y4x3-v6j2 

[153] A. Ray, V. Kalogera, Reexamining Evidence of a Pair-instability Mass Gap in the Binary Black Hole Population, Astrophys. J. Lett. 998 (1) (2026) L20. arXiv:2510.18867 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ae374d .[154] M. Mould, J. Heinzel, S. Álvarez-López, C. Plun-kett, N. E. Wolfe, S. Vitale, Measurement prospects for the pair-instability mass cuto ff with gravitational waves, Phys. Rev. D 113 (2026) 103021. doi:10.1103/sqy9-nnqq .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ sqy9-nnqq 

[155] H. Tong, M. Fishbach, E. Thrane, M. Mould, T. A. Callister, A. M. Farah, N. Guttman, S. Banagiri, D. Beltran-Martinez, B. Farr, S. Galaudage, J. Godfrey, J. Heinzel, M. Kalomenopoulos, S. J. Miller, A. Vi-jaykumar, Evidence of the pair-instability gap from black-hole masses, Nature652 (8111) (2026) 874–877. arXiv:2509.04151 ,

doi:10.1038/s41586-026-10359-0 .[156] J. Godfrey, B. Edelman, B. Farr, Cosmic Cousins: Identification of a Subpopulation of Bi-nary Black Holes Consistent with Isolated Binary Evolution (4 2023). arXiv:2304.01288 .[157] S. Banagiri, E. Thrane, P. D. Lasky, Evidence for Three Subpopulations of Merging Binary Black Holes at Di ff erent Primary Masses, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2509.15646 arXiv:2509. 15646 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.15646 .[158] J. Fuller, L. Ma, Most Black Holes Are Born Very Slowly Rotating, ApJL881 (1) (2019) L1. arXiv:1907.03714 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/ab339b .[159] I. Mandel, A. Farmer, Merging stellar-mass binary black holes, Phys. Rep.955 (2022) 1– 24. arXiv:1806.05820 , doi:10.1016/j. physrep.2022.01.003 .[160] C. L. Rodriguez, P. Amaro-Seoane, S. Chat-terjee, F. A. Rasio, Post-Newtonian Dynam-ics in Dense Star Clusters: Highly Eccentric, Highly Spinning, and Repeated Binary Black Hole Mergers, Phys. Rev. Lett.120 (15) (2018) 52 151101. arXiv:1712.04937 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.120.151101 .[161] T. A. Callister, S. J. Miller, K. Chatziioan-nou, W. M. Farr, No Evidence that the Major-ity of Black Holes in Binaries Have Zero Spin, ApJL937 (1) (2022) L13. arXiv:2205.08574 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac847e .[162] H. Tong, S. Galaudage, E. Thrane, Popula-tion properties of spinning black holes us-ing the gravitational-wave transient catalog 3, Phys. Rev. D106 (10) (2022) 103019. arXiv: 2209.02206 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.106. 103019 .[163] C. Kimball, C. Talbot, C. P. L. Berry, M. Car-ney, M. Zevin, E. Thrane, V. Kalogera, Black Hole Genealogy: Identifying Hierarchical Merg-ers with Gravitational Waves, ApJ900 (2) (2020) 177. arXiv:2005.00023 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/aba518 .[164] J. Roulet, H. S. Chia, S. Olsen, L. Dai, T. Venu-madhav, B. Zackay, M. Zaldarriaga, Distribu-tion of e ff ective spins and masses of binary black holes from the LIGO and Virgo O1-O3a observing runs, Phys. Rev. D104 (8) (2021) 083010. arXiv:2105.10580 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.104.083010 .[165] S. Galaudage, C. Talbot, T. Nagar, D. Jain, E. Thrane, I. Mandel, Building Better Spin Models for Merging Binary Black Holes: Ev-idence for Nonspinning and Rapidly Spinning Nearly Aligned Subpopulations, ApJL921 (1) (2021) L15. arXiv:2109.02424 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ac2f3c .[166] S. Biscoveanu, M. Isi, S. Vitale, V. Varma, New Spin on LIGO-Virgo Binary Black Holes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 (17) (2021) 171103. arXiv:2007.09156 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.171103 .[167] M. Mould, D. Gerosa, F. S. Broekgaarden, N. Steinle, Which black hole formed first? Mass-ratio reversal in massive binary stars from gravitational-wave data, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 517 (2) (2022) 2738–2745. arXiv:2205. 12329 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stac2859 .[168] M. Fishbach, C. Kimball, V. Kalogera, Limits on Hierarchical Black Hole Mergers from the Most Negative χ e f f Systems, Astrophys. J. Lett. 935 (2) (2022) L26. arXiv:2207.02924 , doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac86c4 .[169] A. Vijaykumar, A. M. Farah, M. Fishbach, The maximum mass ratio of hierarchical binary black hole mergers may cause the q– χeff correlation, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 999 (2) (2026) L30. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ae4878 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 2041-8213/ae4878 

[170] V. Baibhav, D. Gerosa, E. Berti, K. W. K. Wong, T. Helfer, M. Mould, The mass gap, the spin gap, and the origin of merging bi-nary black holes, Phys. Rev. D102 (4) (2020) 043002. arXiv:2004.00650 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.102.043002 .[171] M. Fishbach, C. Kimball, V. Kalogera, Lim-its on Hierarchical Black Hole Mergers from the Most Negative χ e f f Systems, ApJL935 (2) (2022) L26. arXiv:2207.02924 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ac86c4 .[172] S. Banagiri, T. A. Callister, C. Adamcewicz, Z. Doctor, V. Kalogera, Structure and Skew-ness of the E ff ective Inspiral Spin Distribution of Binary Black Hole Mergers, Astrophys. J. 990 (2) (2025) 147. arXiv:2501.06712 , doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf4c6 .[173] I. Mandel, F. S. Broekgaarden, Rates of com-pact object coalescences, Living Reviews in Rel-ativity 25 (1) (2022) 1. arXiv:2107.14239 ,

doi:10.1007/s41114-021-00034-3 .[174] C. J. Neijssel, A. Vigna-Gómez, S. Stevenson, J. W. Barrett, S. M. Gaebel, F. S. Broekgaarden, S. E. de Mink, D. Szécsi, S. Vinciguerra, I. Man-del, The e ff ect of the metallicity-specific star for-mation history on double compact object merg-ers, MNRAS490 (3) (2019) 3740–3759. arXiv: 1906.08136 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stz2840 .[175] N. Giacobbo, M. Mapelli, M. Spera, Merging black hole binaries: the e ff ects of progenitor’s metallicity, mass-loss rate and Eddington fac-tor, MNRAS474 (3) (2018) 2959–2974. arXiv: 1711.03556 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stx2933 .[176] N. Giacobbo, M. Mapelli, The progenitors of compact-object binaries: impact of metallic-ity, common envelope and natal kicks, MN-RAS480 (2) (2018) 2011–2030. arXiv:1806. 00001 , doi:10.1093/mnras/sty1999 .53 [177] C. L. Rodriguez, A. Loeb, Redshift evolution of the black hole merger rate from globular clusters, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 866 (1) (2018) L5. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aae377 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 2041-8213/aae377 

[178] M. Fishbach, V. Kalogera, The Time Delay Dis-tribution and Formation Metallicity of LIGO-Virgos Binary Black Holes, ApJL914 (2) (2021) L30. arXiv:2105.06491 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/ac05c4 .[179] M. Gallegos-Garcia, C. P. L. Berry, P. Marchant, V. Kalogera, Binary Black Hole Formation with Detailed Modeling: Stable Mass Trans-fer Leads to Lower Merger Rates, ApJ922 (2) (2021) 110. arXiv:2107.05702 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/ac2610 .[180] V. Delfavero, K. E. S. Ford, B. McKernan, H. E. Cook, K. Nathaniel, J. Postiglione, S. Ray, E. McPike, R. O’Shaughnessy, McFACTS III: Compact Binary Mergers from Active Galactic Nucleus Disks over an Entire Synthetic Universe, ApJ989 (1) (2025) 67. arXiv:2410.18815 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ade4c1 .[181] J. Abadie, B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Ab-bott, M. Abernathy, T. Accadia, F. Acernese, C. Adams, R. Adhikari, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. S. Allen, E. Amador Ceron, D. Amariutei, R. S. Amin, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, K. Arai, M. A. Arain, M. C. Araya, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, D. Atkinson, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, B. E. Aylott, S. Babak, P. Baker, G. Ballardin, S. Ballmer, D. Barker, F. Barone, B. Barr, P. Barriga, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, M. Bastar-rika, A. Basti, J. Batch, J. Bauchrowitz, T. S. Bauer, M. Bebronne, B. Behnke, M. G. Beker, A. S. Bell, A. Belletoile, I. Belopolski, M. Be-nacquista, J. M. Berliner, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, N. Beveridge, P. T. Beyersdorf, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, J. Birch, R. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bizouard, E. Black, J. K. Blackburn, L. Blackburn, D. Blair, B. Bland, M. Blom, O. Bock, T. P. Bodiya, C. Bogan, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, L. Bonelli, R. Bon-nand, R. Bork, M. Born, V. Boschi, S. Bose, L. Bosi, B. Bouhou, S. Braccini, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, V. B. Braginsky, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, J. Breyer, T. Briant, D. O. Bridges, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, M. Britzger, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, A. Brummit, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, J. Burguet–Castell, O. Burmeister, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, P. Campsie, J. Cannizzo, K. Cannon, B. Canuel, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, F. Carbognani, S. Caride, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cava-lieri, G. Cella, C. Cepeda, E. Cesarini, O. Chaibi, T. Chalermsongsak, E. Chalkley, P. Charlton, E. Chassande-Mottin, S. Chelkowski, Y. Chen, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, H. Cho, N. Chris-tensen, S. S. Y. Chua, C. T. Y. Chung, S. Chung, G. Ciani, F. Clara, D. E. Clark, J. Clark, J. H. Clayton, F. Cleva, E. Coccia, P.-F. Cohadon, C. N. Colacino, J. Colas, A. Colla, M. Colom-bini, A. Conte, R. Conte, D. Cook, T. R. Cor-bitt, M. Cordier, N. Cornish, A. Corsi, C. A. Costa, M. Coughlin, J.-P. Coulon, P. Couvares, D. M. Coward, D. C. Coyne, J. D. E. Creighton, T. D. Creighton, A. M. Cruise, A. Cumming, L. Cunningham, E. Cuoco, R. M. Cutler, K. Dahl, S. L. Danilishin, R. Dannenberg, S. D’Antonio, K. Danzmann, V. Dattilo, B. Daudert, H. Dav-eloza, M. Davier, G. Davies, E. J. Daw, R. Day, T. Dayanga, R. De Rosa, D. DeBra, G. De-breczeni, J. Degallaix, W. Del Pozzo, M. del Prete, T. Dent, V. Dergachev, R. DeRosa, R. De-Salvo, S. Dhurandhar, L. Di Fiore, A. Di Li-eto, I. Di Palma, M. Di Paolo Emilio, Search for gravitational waves from low mass compact bi-nary coalescence in LIGO’s sixth science run and Virgo’s science runs 2 and 3, Phys. Rev. D85 (8) (2012) 082002. arXiv:1111.7314 , doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.85.082002 .[182] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, C. C. Arceneaux, J. S. Areeda, N. Arnaud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ash-ton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, P. Auf-muth, C. Aulbert, S. Babak, P. Bacon, M. K. M. Bader, P. T. Baker, F. Baldaccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, C. Baune, V. Bavigadda, M. Bazzan, M. Be-54 jger, A. S. Bell, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhandare, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, J. Birch, R. Birney, S. Biscans, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, C. Biwer, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, M. Boer, G. Bo-gaert, C. Bogan, A. Bohe, C. Bond, F. Bondu, R. Bonnand, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, V. B. Braginsky, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, J. E. Broida, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, D. D. Brown, N. M. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, T. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, K. C. Can-non, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Car-bognani, S. Caride, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casen-tini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, L. Cerboni Ba-iardi, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, S. J. Chamberlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chassande-Mottin, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Cheng, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, S. Chua, S. Chung, G. Ciani, F. Clara, J. A. Clark, F. Cleva, E. Coccia, P.-F. Cohadon, A. Colla, C. G. Collette, L. Cominsky, M. Con-stancio., Jr., A. Conte, L. Conti, D. Cook, T. R. Corbitt, N. Cornish, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, M. W. Coughlin, S. B. Coughlin, J.-P. Coulon, S. T. Countryman, P. Couvares, E. E. Cowan, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, K. Craig, J. D. E. Creighton, J. Cripe, S. G. Crowder, A. Cumming, L. Cun-ningham, Upper Limits on the Rates of Binary Neutron Star and Neutron Star-Black Hole Merg-ers from Advanced LIGO’s First Observing Run, ApJL832 (2) (2016) L21. arXiv:1607.07456 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8205/832/2/L21 .[183] F. Özel, D. Psaltis, R. Narayan, A. S. Villar-real, On the mass distribution and birth masses of neutron stars, The Astrophysical Journal 757 (1) (2012) 55. [184] B. Kiziltan, A. Kottas, M. De Yoreo, S. E. Thorsett, The Neutron Star Mass Distribution, arXiv e-prints (2013) arXiv:1309.6635 arXiv:1309.6635 ,

doi:10.48550/arXiv.1309.6635 .[185] W. M. Farr, K. Chatziioannou, A Population-Informed Mass Estimate for Pulsar J0740 +6620, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society 4 (5) (2020) 65. arXiv:2005.00032 ,

doi:10.3847/2515-5172/ab9088 .[186] D.-S. Shao, S.-P. Tang, J.-L. Jiang, Y.-Z. Fan, Maximum mass cuto ff in the neutron star mass distribution and the prospect of form-ing supramassive objects in the double neu-tron star mergers, Phys. Rev. D102 (6) (2020) 063006. arXiv:2009.04275 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.102.063006 .[187] V. Kalogera, G. Baym, The Maximum Mass of a Neutron Star, ApJL470 (1996) L61. arXiv: astro-ph/9608059 , doi:10.1086/310296 .[188] B. Müller, A. Heger, J. Powell, Minimum neu-tron star mass in neutrino-driven supernova ex-plosions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 (2025) 071403. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.134.071403 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.134.071403 

[189] R. C. Tolman, Static Solutions of Einstein’s Field Equations for Spheres of Fluid, Physical Re-view 55 (4) (1939) 364–373. doi:10.1103/ PhysRev.55.364 .[190] J. R. Oppenheimer, G. M. Volko ff , On Massive Neutron Cores, Physical Review 55 (4) (1939) 374–381. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374 .[191] J. Alsing, H. O. Silva, E. Berti, Evidence for a maximum mass cut-o ff in the neu-tron star mass distribution and constraints on the equation of state, Monthly No-tices of the Royal Astronomical Society 478 (1) (2018) 1377–1391. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 478/1/1377/25027321/sty1065.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/sty1065 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ sty1065 

[192] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Ad-desso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, B. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Ag-garwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. Allen, A. Allocca, M. A. Aloy, 55 P. A. Altin, A. Amato, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arnaud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, D. V. Atallah, F. Aubin, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, A. Avila-Alvarez, S. Babak, P. Bacon, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, P. T. Baker, F. Bal-daccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Bana-giri, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Bar-ish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, S. Barnum, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, C. Beer, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, D. Beniwal, M. Bensch, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, J. J. Bero, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, R. Bhandare, I. A. Bilenko, S. A. Bilgili, G. Billingsley, C. R. Billman, J. Birch, R. Bir-ney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, N. Bode, M. Boer, Y. Boetzel, G. Bogaert, A. Bohe, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, C. D. Booth, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, K. Bossie, V. Bossilkov, J. Bosveld, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, F. Brighenti, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, P. Canizares, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Carbognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, G. Carullo, J. C. Diaz, C. Casen-tini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, P. Cerdá-Durán, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, O. Chaibi, S. J. Cham-berlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatterjee, K. Chatzi-ioannou, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, H.-P. Cheng, H. Y. Chia, A. Chin-carini, A. Chiummo, T. Chmiel, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, A. J. K. Chua, S. Chua, K. W. Chung, S. Chung, G. Ciani, A. A. Ciobanu, R. Ciolfi, F. Cipri-ano, C. E. Cirelli, A. Cirone, F. Clara, J. A. Clark, P. Clearwater, F. Cleva, C. Cocchieri, E. Coccia, P.-F. Cohadon, D. Cohen, A. Colla, C. G. Collette, C. Collins, L. R. Cominsky, M. Constancio, L. Conti, S. J. Cooper, P. Cor-ban, T. R. Corbitt, I. Cordero-Carrión, K. R. Corley, N. Cornish, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, R. Cotesta, M. W. Coughlin, S. B. Cough-lin, J.-P. Coulon, S. T. Countryman, P. Cou-vares, P. B. Covas, E. E. Cowan, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, J. D. E. Creighton, T. D. Creighton, J. Cripe, S. G. Crow-der, T. J. Cullen, A. Cumming, L. Cunning-ham, E. Cuoco, T. D. Canton, G. Dálya, S. L. Danilishin, S. D’Antonio, K. Danzmann, A. Das-gupta, C. F. D. S. Costa, V. Dattilo, I. Dave, M. Davier, D. Davis, E. J. Daw, B. Day, D. De-Bra, M. Deenadayalan, J. Degallaix, M. De Lau-rentis, S. Deléglise, W. Del Pozzo, N. Demos, T. Denker, T. Dent, R. De Pietri, J. Derby, V. Dergachev, R. De Rosa, C. De Rossi, R. De-Salvo, O. de Varona, S. Dhurandhar, M. C. Díaz, T. Dietrich, L. Di Fiore, M. Di Gio-vanni, T. Di Girolamo, A. Di Lieto, B. Ding, S. Di Pace, I. Di Palma, F. Di Renzo, A. Dmitriev, Z. Doctor, V. Dolique, F. Donovan, K. L. Dooley, S. Doravari, I. Dorrington, M. D. Álvarez, T. P. Downes, M. Drago, C. Dreissigacker, J. C. Drig-gers, Z. Du, R. Dudi, P. Dupej, S. E. Dwyer, P. J. Easter, T. B. Edo, M. C. Edwards, A. E ffl er, H.-B. Eggenstein, P. Ehrens, J. Eichholz, S. S. Eiken-berry, M. Eisenmann, R. A. Eisenstein, R. C. Essick, H. Estelles, D. Estevez, Z. B. Etienne, T. Etzel, M. Evans, T. M. Evans, V. Fafone, H. Fair, S. Fairhurst, X. Fan, S. Farinon, B. Farr, W. M. Farr, E. J. Fauchon-Jones, M. Favata, M. Fays, C. Fee, H. Fehrmann, J. Feicht, M. M. Fejer, F. Feng, A. Fernandez-Galiana, I. Ferrante, E. C. Ferreira, F. Ferrini, F. Fidecaro, I. Fiori, D. Fiorucci, M. Fishbach, R. P. Fisher, J. M. Fishner, M. Fitz-Axen, R. Flaminio, M. Fletcher, H. Fong, J. A. Font, P. W. F. Forsyth, S. S. Forsyth, J.-D. Fournier, S. Frasca, F. Frasconi, Z. Frei, A. Freise, R. Frey, V. Frey, P. Fritschel, V. V. Frolov, P. Fulda, M. Fy ff e, H. A. Gabbard, B. U. Gadre, S. M. Gaebel, J. R. Gair, L. Gam-maitoni, M. R. Ganija, S. G. Gaonkar, A. Garcia, C. García-Quirós, F. Garufi, B. Gateley, S. Gau-dio, G. Gaur, V. Gayathri, G. Gemme, E. Genin, A. Gennai, D. George, J. George, L. Gergely, V. Germain, S. Ghonge, A. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, B. Giacomazzo, J. A. Giaime, K. D. 56 Giardina, A. Giazotto, K. Gill, G. Giordano, L. Glover, E. Goetz, R. Goetz, B. Goncharov, G. González, J. M. G. Castro, A. Gopakumar, M. L. Gorodetsky, S. E. Gossan, M. Gosselin, R. Gouaty, A. Grado, C. Graef, M. Granata, A. Grant, S. Gras, C. Gray, G. Greco, A. C. Green, R. Green, E. M. Gretarsson, P. Groot, H. Grote, S. Grunewald, P. Gruning, G. M. Guidi, H. K. Gulati, X. Guo, A. Gupta, M. K. Gupta, K. E. Gushwa, E. K. Gustafson, R. Gustafson, O. Halim, B. R. Hall, E. D. Hall, E. Z. Hamilton, H. F. Hamilton, G. Hammond, M. Haney, M. M. Hanke, J. Hanks, C. Hanna, M. D. Hannam, O. A. Hannuksela, J. Hanson, T. Hardwick, J. Harms, G. M. Harry, I. W. Harry, M. J. Hart, C.-J. Haster, K. Haughian, J. Healy, A. Heidmann, M. C. Heintze, H. Heitmann, P. Hello, G. Hem-ming, M. Hendry, I. S. Heng, J. Hennig, A. W. Heptonstall, F. J. Hernandez, M. Heurs, S. Hild, T. Hinderer, D. Hoak, S. Hochheim, D. Hofman, N. A. Holland, K. Holt, D. E. Holz, P. Hopkins, C. Horst, J. Hough, E. A. Houston, E. J. How-ell, A. Hreibi, E. A. Huerta, D. Huet, B. Hughey, M. Hulko, S. Husa, S. H. Huttner, T. Huynh-Dinh, A. Iess, N. Indik, C. Ingram, R. Inta, G. In-tini, H. N. Isa, J.-M. Isac, M. Isi, B. R. Iyer, K. Izumi, T. Jacqmin, K. Jani, P. Jaranowski, D. S. Johnson, W. W. Johnson, D. I. Jones, R. Jones, R. J. G. Jonker, L. Ju, J. Junker, C. V. Kalaghatgi, V. Kalogera, B. Kamai, S. Kand-hasamy, G. Kang, J. B. Kanner, S. J. Kapadia, S. Karki, K. S. Karvinen, M. Kasprzack, W. Kas-taun, M. Katolik, S. Katsanevas, E. Katsavouni-dis, W. Katzman, S. Kaufer, K. Kawabe, N. V. Keerthana, F. Kéfélian, D. Keitel, A. J. Kemball, R. Kennedy, J. S. Key, F. Y. Khalili, B. Khamesra, H. Khan, I. Khan, S. Khan, Z. Khan, E. A. Khazanov, N. Kijbunchoo, C. Kim, J. C. Kim, K. Kim, W. Kim, W. S. Kim, Y.-M. Kim, E. J. King, P. J. King, M. Kinley-Hanlon, R. Kirch-ho ff , J. S. Kissel, L. Kleybolte, S. Klimenko, T. D. Knowles, P. Koch, S. M. Koehlenbeck, S. Koley, V. Kondrashov, A. Kontos, M. Ko-robko, W. Z. Korth, I. Kowalska, D. B. Kozak, C. Krämer, V. Kringel, B. Krishnan, A. Królak, G. Kuehn, P. Kumar, R. Kumar, S. Kumar, L. Kuo, A. Kutynia, S. Kwang, B. D. Lackey, K. H. Lai, M. Landry, P. Landry, R. N. Lang, J. Lange, B. Lantz, R. K. Lanza, A. Lartaux-Vollard, P. D. Lasky, M. Laxen, A. Lazzarini, C. Lazzaro, P. Leaci, S. Leavey, C. H. Lee, H. K. Lee, H. M. Lee, H. W. Lee, K. Lee, J. Lehmann, A. Lenon, M. Leonardi, N. Leroy, N. Letendre, Y. Levin, J. Li, T. G. F. Li, X. Li, S. D. Linker, T. B. Littenberg, J. Liu, X. Liu, R. K. L. Lo, N. A. Lockerbie, L. T. London, A. Longo, M. Lorenzini, V. Loriette, M. Lor-mand, G. Losurdo, J. D. Lough, C. O. Lousto, G. Lovelace, H. Lück, D. Lumaca, A. P. Lund-gren, R. Lynch, Y. Ma, R. Macas, S. Macfoy, B. Machenschalk, M. MacInnis, D. M. Macleod, I. M. n. Hernandez, F. Magaña Sandoval, L. M. n. Zertuche, R. M. Magee, E. Majorana, I. Mak-simovic, N. Man, V. Mandic, V. Mangano, G. L. Mansell, M. Manske, M. Mantovani, F. Marchesoni, F. Marion, S. Márka, Z. Márka, C. Markakis, A. S. Markosyan, A. Markowitz, E. Maros, A. Marquina, F. Martelli, L. Martellini, I. W. Martin, R. M. Martin, D. V. Martynov, K. Mason, E. Massera, A. Masserot, T. J. Massinger, M. Masso-Reid, S. Mastrogiovanni, A. Matas, F. Matichard, L. Matone, N. Maval-vala, N. Mazumder, J. J. McCann, R. McCarthy, D. E. McClelland, S. McCormick, L. McCuller, S. C. McGuire, J. McIver, D. J. McManus, T. McRae, S. T. McWilliams, D. Meacher, G. D. Meadors, M. Mehmet, J. Meidam, E. Mejuto-Villa, A. Melatos, G. Mendell, D. Mendoza-Gandara, R. A. Mercer, L. Mereni, E. L. Mer-ilh, M. Merzougui, S. Meshkov, C. Messen-ger, C. Messick, R. Metzdor ff , P. M. Mey-ers, H. Miao, C. Michel, H. Middleton, E. E. Mikhailov, L. Milano, A. L. Miller, A. Miller, B. B. Miller, J. Miller, M. Millhouse, J. Mills, M. C. Milovich-Go ff , O. Minazzoli, Y. Mi-nenkov, J. Ming, C. Mishra, S. Mitra, V. P. Mitrofanov, G. Mitselmakher, R. Mittleman, D. Mo ff a, K. Mogushi, M. Mohan, S. R. P. Mo-hapatra, M. Montani, C. J. Moore, D. Moraru, G. Moreno, S. Morisaki, B. Mours, C. M. Mow-Lowry, G. Mueller, A. W. Muir, A. Mukher-jee, D. Mukherjee, S. Mukherjee, N. Mukund, A. Mullavey, J. Munch, E. A. Muñiz, M. Mu-ratore, P. G. Murray, A. Nagar, K. Napier, I. Nardecchia, L. Naticchioni, R. K. Nayak, J. Neilson, G. Nelemans, T. J. N. Nelson, M. Nery, A. Neunzert, L. Nevin, J. M. New-port, K. Y. Ng, S. Ng, P. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, D. Nichols, A. B. Nielsen, S. Nis-sanke, A. Nitz, F. Nocera, D. Nolting, C. North, L. K. Nuttall, M. Obergaulinger, J. Oberling, B. D. O’Brien, G. D. O’Dea, G. H. Ogin, J. J. Oh, S. H. Oh, F. Ohme, H. Ohta, M. A. Okada, M. Oliver, P. Oppermann, R. J. 57 Oram, B. O’Reilly, R. Ormiston, L. F. Or-tega, R. O’Shaughnessy, S. Ossokine, D. J. Ot-taway, H. Overmier, B. J. Owen, A. E. Pace, G. Pagano, J. Page, M. A. Page, A. Pai, S. A. Pai, J. R. Palamos, O. Palashov, C. Palomba, A. Pal-Singh, H. Pan, H.-W. Pan, B. Pang, P. T. H. Pang, C. Pankow, F. Pannarale, B. C. Pant, F. Paoletti, A. Paoli, M. A. Papa, A. Parida, W. Parker, D. Pascucci, A. Pasqualetti, R. Pas-saquieti, D. Passuello, M. Patil, B. Patricelli, B. L. Pearlstone, C. Pedersen, M. Pedraza, R. Pe-durand, L. Pekowsky, A. Pele, S. Penn, C. J. Perez, A. Perreca, L. M. Perri, H. P. Pfeif-fer, M. Phelps, K. S. Phukon, O. J. Piccinni, M. Pichot, F. Piergiovanni, V. Pierro, G. Pillant, L. Pinard, I. M. Pinto, M. Pirello, M. Pitkin, R. Poggiani, P. Popolizio, E. K. Porter, L. Pos-senti, A. Post, J. Powell, J. Prasad, J. W. W. Pratt, G. Pratten, V. Predoi, T. Prestegard, M. Principe, S. Privitera, G. A. Prodi, L. G. Prokhorov, O. Puncken, M. Punturo, P. Puppo, M. Pürrer, H. Qi, V. Quetschke, E. A. Quin-tero, R. Quitzow-James, F. J. Raab, D. S. Ra-beling, H. Radkins, P. Ra ff ai, S. Raja, C. Ra-jan, B. Rajbhandari, M. Rakhmanov, K. E. Ramirez, A. Ramos-Buades, J. Rana, P. Ra-pagnani, V. Raymond, M. Razzano, J. Read, T. Regimbau, L. Rei, S. Reid, D. H. Reitze, W. Ren, F. Ricci, P. M. Ricker, G. Riemenschnei-der, K. Riles, M. Rizzo, N. A. Robertson, R. Ro-bie, F. Robinet, T. Robson, A. Rocchi, L. Rol-land, J. G. Rollins, V. J. Roma, R. Romano, C. L. Romel, J. H. Romie, D. Rosi´ nska, M. P. Ross, S. Rowan, A. Rüdiger, P. Ruggi, G. Rutins, K. Ryan, S. Sachdev, T. Sadecki, M. Sakel-lariadou, L. Salconi, M. Saleem, F. Salemi, A. Samajdar, L. Sammut, L. M. Sampson, E. J. Sanchez, L. E. Sanchez, N. Sanchis-Gual, V. Sandberg, J. R. Sanders, N. Sarin, B. Sassolas, B. S. Sathyaprakash, P. R. Saul-son, O. Sauter, R. L. Savage, A. Sawadsky, P. Schale, M. Scheel, J. Scheuer, P. Schmidt, R. Schnabel, R. M. S. Schofield, A. Schönbeck, E. Schreiber, D. Schuette, B. W. Schulte, B. F. Schutz, S. G. Schwalbe, J. Scott, S. M. Scott, E. Seidel, D. Sellers, A. S. Sengupta, D. Sen-tenac, V. Sequino, A. Sergeev, Y. Setyawati, D. A. Shaddock, T. J. Sha ff er, A. A. Shah, M. S. Shahriar, M. B. Shaner, L. Shao, B. Shapiro, P. Shawhan, H. Shen, D. H. Shoemaker, D. M. Shoemaker, K. Siellez, X. Siemens, M. Sieni-awska, D. Sigg, A. D. Silva, L. P. Singer, A. Singh, A. Singhal, A. M. Sintes, B. J. J. Slagmolen, T. J. Slaven-Blair, B. Smith, J. R. Smith, R. J. E. Smith, S. Somala, E. J. Son, B. Sorazu, F. Sorrentino, T. Souradeep, A. P. Spencer, A. K. Srivastava, K. Staats, M. Steinke, J. Steinlechner, S. Steinlechner, D. Steinmeyer, B. Steltner, S. P. Stevenson, D. Stocks, R. Stone, D. J. Stops, K. A. Strain, G. Stratta, S. E. Stri-gin, A. Strunk, R. Sturani, A. L. Stuver, T. Z. Summerscales, L. Sun, S. Sunil, J. Suresh, P. J. Sutton, B. L. Swinkels, M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, M. Tacca, S. C. Tait, C. Talbot, D. Talukder, D. B. Tanner, M. Tápai, A. Taracchini, J. D. Tasson, J. A. Taylor, R. Taylor, S. V. Tewari, T. Theeg, F. Thies, E. G. Thomas, M. Thomas, P. Thomas, K. A. Thorne, E. Thrane, S. Ti-wari, V. Tiwari, K. V. Tokmakov, K. Toland, M. Tonelli, Z. Tornasi, A. Torres-Forné, C. I. Torrie, D. Töyrä, F. Travasso, G. Traylor, J. Tri-nastic, M. C. Tringali, L. Trozzo, K. W. Tsang, M. Tse, R. Tso, D. Tsuna, L. Tsukada, D. Tuyen-bayev, K. Ueno, D. Ugolini, A. L. Urban, S. A. Usman, H. Vahlbruch, G. Vajente, G. Valdes, N. van Bakel, M. van Beuzekom, J. F. J. van den Brand, C. Van Den Broeck, D. C. Vander-Hyde, L. van der Schaaf, J. V. van Heijningen, A. A. van Veggel, M. Vardaro, V. Varma, S. Vass, M. Vasúth, A. Vecchio, G. Vedovato, J. Veitch, P. J. Veitch, K. Venkateswara, G. Venugopalan, D. Verkindt, F. Vetrano, A. Viceré, A. D. Viets, S. Vinciguerra, D. J. Vine, J.-Y. Vinet, S. Vi-tale, T. Vo, H. Vocca, C. Vorvick, S. P. Vy-atchanin, A. R. Wade, L. E. Wade, M. Wade, R. Walet, M. Walker, L. Wallace, S. Walsh, G. Wang, H. Wang, J. Z. Wang, W. H. Wang, Y. F. Wang, R. L. Ward, J. Warner, M. Was, J. Watchi, B. Weaver, L.-W. Wei, M. Weinert, A. J. We-instein, R. Weiss, F. Wellmann, L. Wen, E. K. Wessel, P. Weßels, J. Westerweck, K. Wette, J. T. Whelan, B. F. Whiting, C. Whittle, D. Wilken, D. Williams, R. D. Williams, A. R. Williamson, J. L. Willis, B. Willke, M. H. Wimmer, W. Win-kler, C. C. Wipf, H. Wittel, G. Woan, J. Woehler, J. K. Wo ff ord, W. K. Wong, J. Worden, J. L. Wright, D. S. Wu, D. M. Wysocki, S. Xiao, W. Yam, H. Yamamoto, C. C. Yancey, L. Yang, M. J. Yap, M. Yazback, H. Yu, H. Yu, M. Yvert, A. Zadro˙ zny, M. Zanolin, T. Zelenova, J.-P. Zen-dri, M. Zevin, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y.-H. Zhang, C. Zhao, M. Zhou, Z. Zhou, S. J. Zhu, X. J. Zhu, A. B. Zimmerman, Y. Zlochower, M. E. Zucker, J. Zweizig, Proper-58 ties of the binary neutron star merger gw170817, Phys. Rev. X 9 (2019) 011001. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevX.9.011001 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevX.9.011001 

[193] D. Chattopadhyay, S. Stevenson, J. R. Hur-ley, M. Bailes, F. Broekgaarden, Modelling neutron star-black hole binaries: future pulsar surveys and gravitational wave detectors, MN-RAS504 (3) (2021) 3682–3710. arXiv:2011. 13503 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stab973 .[194] S. Chaty, High-mass x-ray binaries (hmxb), in: Accreting Binaries, 2514-3433, IOP Publishing, 2022, pp. 6–1 to 6–58. 

doi:10.1088/2514-3433/ac595fch6 .URL https://doi.org/10.1088/ 2514-3433/ac595fch6 

[195] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, A. Adams, C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, K. M. Aleman, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Al-tin, A. Amato, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, K. Arai, Y. Arai, S. Araki, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Aritomi, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, P. Aufmuth, K. Aultoneal, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, L. Baiotti, J. Baird, R. Ba-jpai, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, M. Bals, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Bana-giri, D. Bankar, R. S. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Bar-neo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsug-lia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bar-tos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Be-dakihale, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, M. G. Benjamin, R. Benkel, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. Benyaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, R. Bhandare, A. V. Bhandari, D. Bhattachar-jee, S. Bhaumik, J. Bidler, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Bis-cans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bo-gaert, M. Boldrini, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bon-nand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, R. Bus-cicchio, D. Buskulic, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, M. Caesar, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, H. W. Cain, III, J. Calderón Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, Z. Cao, E. Capocasa, E. Capote, G. Cara-pella, F. Carbognani, J. B. Carlin, M. F. Car-ney, Observation of Gravitational Waves from Two Neutron Star-Black Hole Coalescences, ApJL915 (1) (2021) L5. arXiv:2106.15163 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac082e .[196] A. G. Abac, R. Abbott, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, S. Adhicary, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, M. A. Abchouyeh, O. D. Aguiar, I. Aguilar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, S. Akçay, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Al-Jodah, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, A. Amato, L. Amez-Droz, A. Amorosi, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. An-derson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. Andres, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, L. Argianas, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aron-son, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. As-siduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. Aultoneal, G. Avallone, D. Azrad, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, E. Bagui, J. G. Baier, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Ba-nagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, P. Baral, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, 59 D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bar-tos, S. Basak, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, D. E. Bates, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bay-ley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Baz-zan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Be-jger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, V. Benedetto, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. B. Yaala, S. Bera, M. Berbel, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhau-mik, S. Bhowmick, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, A. Boudon, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Braglia, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. Brandt, I. Braun, M. Breschi, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brockmueller, A. F. Brooks, B. C. Brown, D. D. Brown, M. L. Brozzetti, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, F. Bucci, J. Buchanan, O. Bulashenko, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, Observation of Gravitational Waves from the Coalescence of a 2.5–4.5 M ⊙ Compact Object and a Neutron Star, ApJL970 (2) (2024) L34. arXiv:2404.04248 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ad5beb .[197] P. Landry, J. S. Read, The Mass Distribution of Neutron Stars in Gravitational-wave Binaries, ApJL921 (2) (2021) L25. arXiv:2107.04559 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac2f3e .[198] R. Abbott, et al., GW190814: Gravitational waves from the coalescence of a 23 solar mass black hole with a 2.6 solar mass compact object, The Astrophysical Journal 896 (2) (2020) L44. 

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab960f .URL https://doi.org/10.3847% 2F2041-8213%2Fab960f 

[199] S. Galaudage, C. Adamcewicz, X.-J. Zhu, S. Stevenson, E. Thrane, Heavy Double Neutron Stars: Birth, Midlife, and Death, ApJL909 (2) (2021) L19. arXiv:2011.01495 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/abe7f6 .[200] R. Essick, P. Landry, Discriminating between Neutron Stars and Black Holes with Imperfect Knowledge of the Maximum Neutron Star Mass, ApJ904 (1) (2020) 80. arXiv:2007.01372 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abbd3b .[201] A. G. Riess, A. V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Cloc-chiatti, A. Diercks, P. M. Garnavich, R. L. Gilliland, C. J. Hogan, S. Jha, R. P. Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M. M. Phillips, D. Reiss, B. P. Schmidt, R. A. Schommer, R. C. Smith, J. Spy-romilio, C. Stubbs, N. B. Suntze ff , J. Tonry, Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Con-stant, AJ116 (3) (1998) 1009–1038. arXiv: astro-ph/9805201 , doi:10.1086/300499 .[202] S. Perlmutter, G. Aldering, G. Goldhaber, R. A. Knop, P. Nugent, P. G. Castro, S. Deustua, S. Fabbro, A. Goobar, D. E. Groom, I. M. Hook, A. G. Kim, M. Y. Kim, J. C. Lee, N. J. Nunes, R. Pain, C. R. Pennypacker, R. Quimby, C. Lidman, R. S. Ellis, M. Irwin, R. G. McMa-hon, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, N. Walton, B. Schae-fer, B. J. Boyle, A. V. Filippenko, T. Mathe-son, A. S. Fruchter, N. Panagia, H. J. M. New-berg, W. J. Couch, T. S. C. Project, Measure-ments of Ω and Λ from 42 High-Redshift Su-pernovae, ApJ517 (2) (1999) 565–586. arXiv: astro-ph/9812133 , doi:10.1086/307221 .[203] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Bal-lardini, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro, N. Bar-tolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed, J.-P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese, J.-F. Cardoso, J. Car-ron, A. Challinor, H. C. Chiang, J. Chluba, L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, D. Contreras, B. P. Crill, F. Cuttaia, P. de Bernardis, G. de Zotti, J. Delabrouille, J.-M. Delouis, E. Di Valentino, J. M. Diego, O. Doré, M. Douspis, A. Ducout, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, G. Efstathiou, F. El-sner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, Y. Fantaye, M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, R. Fernandez-Cobos, F. Finelli, F. Forastieri, M. Frailis, A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frolov, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, R. T. Génova-Santos, M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmundsson, J. Hamann, W. Handley, F. K. Hansen, D. Her-60 ranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, Z. Huang, A. H. Ja ff e, W. C. Jones, A. Karakci, E. Kei-hänen, R. Keskitalo, K. Kiiveri, J. Kim, T. S. Kisner, L. Knox, N. Krachmalnico ff , M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, J.-M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, M. Le Jeune, P. Lemos, J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Lilley, V. Lindholm, M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lu-bin, Y.-Z. Ma, J. F. Macías-Pérez, G. Mag-gio, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, A. Marcos-Caballero, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, M. Martinelli, E. Martínez-González, S. Matar-rese, N. Mauri, J. D. McEwen, P. R. Mein-hold, A. Melchiorri, A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M.-A. Miville-Deschênes, D. Molinari, L. Montier, G. Morgante, A. Moss, P. Natoli, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, L. Pagano, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge, G. Patanchon, H. V. Peiris, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Piacen-tini, L. Polastri, G. Polenta, J.-L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, A. Renzi, G. Rocha, C. Rosset, G. Roudier, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, B. Ruiz-Granados, L. Salvati, M. San-dri, M. Savelainen, D. Scott, E. P. S. Shellard, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, L. D. Spencer, R. Sunyaev, A.-S. Suur-Uski, J. A. Tauber, D. Tavagnacco, M. Tenti, L. To ff olatti, M. Tomasi, T. Trom-betti, L. Valenziano, J. Valiviita, B. Van Tent, L. Vibert, P. Vielva, F. Villa, N. Vittorio, B. D. Wandelt, I. K. Wehus, M. White, S. D. M. White, A. Zacchei, A. Zonca, Planck 2018 re-sults. VI. Cosmological parameters, A&A641 (2020) A6. arXiv:1807.06209 , doi:10. 1051/0004-6361/201833910 .[204] A. G. Riess, W. Yuan, L. M. Macri, D. Scol-nic, D. Brout, S. Casertano, D. O. Jones, Y. Murakami, G. S. Anand, L. Breuval, T. G. Brink, A. V. Filippenko, S. Ho ff mann, S. W. Jha, W. D’arcy Kenworthy, J. Mackenty, B. E. Stahl, W. Zheng, A Comprehensive Measure-ment of the Local Value of the Hubble Con-stant with 1 km s −1 Mpc −1 Uncertainty from the Hubble Space Telescope and the SH0ES Team, ApJL934 (1) (2022) L7. arXiv:2112.04510 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac5c5b .[205] J. R. Gair, A. Ghosh, R. Gray, D. E. Holz, S. Mastrogiovanni, S. Mukherjee, A. Palmese, N. Tamanini, T. Baker, F. Beirnaert, M. Bilicki, H.-Y. Chen, G. Dálya, J. M. Ezquiaga, W. M. Farr, M. Fishbach, J. Garcia-Bellido, T. Ghosh, H.-Y. Huang, C. Karathanasis, K. Leyde, I. M. Hernandez, J. Noller, G. Pierra, P. Ra ff ai, A. E. Romano, M. Seglar-Arroyo, D. A. Steer, C. Turski, M. P. Vaccaro, S. A. Vallejo-Peña, The hitchhiker’s guide to the galaxy catalog approach for dark siren gravitational-wave cosmology, The Astronomical Journal 166 (1) (2023) 22. 

doi:10.3847/1538-3881/acca78 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-3881/acca78 

[206] R. Gray, C. Messenger, J. Veitch, A pixe-lated approach to galaxy catalogue incom-pleteness: improving the dark siren mea-surement of the hubble constant, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 512 (1) (2022) 1127–1140. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 512/1/1127/45303118/stac366.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/stac366 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stac366 

[207] C. Nicolaou, O. Lahav, P. Lemos, W. Hartley, J. Braden, The impact of peculiar velocities on the estimation of the Hubble constant from grav-itational wave standard sirens, MNRAS495 (1) (2020) 90–97. arXiv:1909.09609 , doi:10. 1093/mnras/staa1120 .[208] S. Mastrogiovanni, C. Karathanasis, J. Gair, G. Ashton, S. Rinaldi, H.-Y. Huang, G. Dálya, Cosmology with Gravitational Waves: A Review, Annalen der Physik 536 (2) (2024) 2200180. 

doi:10.1002/andp.202200180 .[209] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Ad-desso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Afrough, B. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agat-suma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Ander-son, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, N. Arnaud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ash-ton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, D. V. Atallah, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, K. Aultoneal, C. Austin, A. Avila-Alvarez, S. Babak, P. Ba-con, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, P. T. Baker, F. Baldaccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, F. Barone, 61 B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, C. Beer, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, J. J. Bero, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhandare, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, C. R. Billman, J. Birch, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, S. Biscov-eanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, C. Biwer, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, A. Bohe, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, K. Bossie, Y. Bouf-fanais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, J. E. Broida, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, P. Canizares, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Carbognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, J. C. Diaz, C. Casentini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cavalieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, P. Cerdá-Durán, G. Cer-retani, E. Cesarini, S. J. Chamberlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatterjee, K. Chatziioannou, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, H.-P. Cheng, H. Chia, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, T. Chmiel, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, A. J. K. Chua, S. Chua, A. K. W. Chung, S. Chung, G. Ciani, R. Ciolfi, A gravitational-wave standard siren measurement of the Hubble constant, Nature551 (7678) (2017) 85–88. arXiv:1710.05835 , doi:10.1038/ nature24471 .[210] K. Hotokezaka, E. Nakar, O. Gottlieb, S. Nissanke, K. Masuda, G. Hallinan, K. P. Mooley, A. T. Deller, A hubble constant measurement from superlumi-nal motion of the jet in gw170817, Na-ture Astronomy 3 (10) (2019) 940–944. 

doi:10.1038/s41550-019-0820-1 .URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41550-019-0820-1 

[211] S. Mukherjee, G. Lavaux, F. R. Bouchet, J. Jasche, B. D. Wandelt, S. Nissanke, F. Leclercq, K. Hotokezaka, Velocity correction for Hubble constant measure-ments from standard sirens, A&A646 (2021) A65. arXiv:1909.08627 ,

doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201936724 .[212] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Atta-dio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldic-chi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bar-tos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Bay-nard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beir-naert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bellie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattachar-jee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Bian-calana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, M. Bilicki, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, 62 S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boettner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, S. Borhanian, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, GWTC-4.0: Con-straints on the Cosmic Expansion Rate and Modified Gravitational-wave Propagation, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2509.04348 arXiv:2509. 04348 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.04348 .[213] S.-J. Jin, J.-Y. Song, T.-Y. Sun, S.-R. Xiao, H. Wang, L.-F. Wang, J.-F. Zhang, X. Zhang, Gravitational wave standard sirens: A brief re-view of cosmological parameter estimation, Sci-ence China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy 69 (2) (2026) 220401. arXiv:2507.12965 ,

doi:10.1007/s11433-025-2829-9 .[214] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Bal-lardini, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro, N. Bar-tolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed, J.-P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese, J.-F. Cardoso, J. Car-ron, A. Challinor, H. C. Chiang, J. Chluba, L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, D. Contreras, B. P. Crill, F. Cuttaia, P. de Bernardis, G. de Zotti, J. Delabrouille, J.-M. Delouis, E. Di Valentino, J. M. Diego, O. Doré, M. Douspis, A. Ducout, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, G. Efstathiou, F. El-sner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, Y. Fantaye, M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, R. Fernandez-Cobos, F. Finelli, F. Forastieri, M. Frailis, A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frolov, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, R. T. Génova-Santos, M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, J. González-Nuevo, K. M. Górski, S. Gratton, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmundsson, J. Hamann, W. Handley, F. K. Hansen, D. Her-ranz, S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, Z. Huang, A. H. Ja ff e, W. C. Jones, A. Karakci, E. Kei-hänen, R. Keskitalo, K. Kiiveri, J. Kim, T. S. Kisner, L. Knox, N. Krachmalnico ff , M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, J.-M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, M. Le Jeune, P. Lemos, J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Lilley, V. Lindholm, M. López-Caniego, P. M. Lu-bin, Y.-Z. Ma, J. F. Macías-Pérez, G. Mag-gio, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, A. Marcos-Caballero, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, M. Martinelli, E. Martínez-González, S. Matar-rese, N. Mauri, J. D. McEwen, P. R. Mein-hold, A. Melchiorri, A. Mennella, M. Migliaccio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M.-A. Miville-Deschênes, D. Molinari, L. Montier, G. Morgante, A. Moss, P. Natoli, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, L. Pagano, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge, G. Patanchon, H. V. Peiris, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Piacen-tini, L. Polastri, G. Polenta, J.-L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, A. Renzi, G. Rocha, C. Rosset, G. Roudier, J. A. Rubiño-Martín, B. Ruiz-Granados, L. Salvati, M. San-dri, M. Savelainen, D. Scott, E. P. S. Shellard, C. Sirignano, G. Sirri, L. D. Spencer, R. Sunyaev, A.-S. Suur-Uski, J. A. Tauber, D. Tavagnacco, M. Tenti, L. To ff olatti, M. Tomasi, T. Trom-betti, L. Valenziano, J. Valiviita, B. Van Tent, L. Vibert, P. Vielva, F. Villa, N. Vittorio, B. D. Wandelt, I. K. Wehus, M. White, S. D. M. White, A. Zacchei, A. Zonca, Planck 2018 re-sults. VI. Cosmological parameters, A&A641 (2020) A6. arXiv:1807.06209 , doi:10. 1051/0004-6361/201833910 .[215] H. Tagawa, S. S. Kimura, Z. Haiman, R. Perna, I. Bartos, Observable Signatures of Stellar-mass Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei, ApJL946 (1) (2023) L3. arXiv:2303.02172 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/acc103 .[216] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, A. Aich, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, S. Akcay, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, S. V. An-gelova, S. Ansoldi, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, Y. Asali, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, P. Aufmuth, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, V. Aven-dano, S. Babak, P. Bacon, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, A. M. Baer, J. Baird, F. Baldac-cini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Bals, A. Bal-samo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, R. S. 63 Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Bar-ish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, D. Beni-wal, M. G. Benjamin, R. Benkel, J. D. Bent-ley, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, R. Bhandare, A. V. Bhandari, J. Bidler, E. Biggs, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Bis-cans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, G. Bis-senbayeva, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, Y. Boetzel, G. Bogaert, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, J. Bosveld, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, F. Brighenti, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, R. Brito, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cado-nati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Cal-loni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, K. C. Can-non, H. Cao, J. Cao, G. Carapella, F. Car-bognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, G. Carullo, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, J. Castañeda, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, P. Cerdá-Durán, E. Cesarini, O. Chaibi, K. Chakravarti, C. Chan, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. A. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatterjee, M. Chaturvedi, K. Chatzi-ioannou, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, GW190412: Ob-servation of a binary-black-hole coalescence with asymmetric masses, Phys. Rev. D102 (4) (2020) 043015. arXiv:2004.08342 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.102.043015 .[217] C. Hoy, C. Mills, S. Fairhurst, Evidence for subdominant multipole moments and precession in merging black-hole-binaries from gwtc-2.1, Phys. Rev. D 106 (2022) 023019. doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.106.023019 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.106.023019 

[218] E. Payne, S. Hourihane, J. Golomb, R. Udall, D. Davis, K. Chatziioannou, Curious case of GW200129: Interplay between spin-precession inference and data-quality issues, Phys. Rev. D106 (10) (2022) 104017. arXiv:2206.11932 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.106.104017 .[219] R. Udall, S. Hourihane, S. Miller, D. Davis, K. Chatziioannou, M. Isi, H. Deshong, An-tialigned spin of GW191109: Glitch mitigation and its implications, Phys. Rev. D111 (2) (2025) 024046. arXiv:2409.03912 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.111.024046 .[220] R. Macas, A. Lundgren, G. Ashton, Revisiting the evidence for precession in GW200129 with machine learning noise mitigation, Phys. Rev. D109 (6) (2024) 062006. arXiv:2311.09921 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.109.062006 .[221] M. Hannam, C. Hoy, J. E. Thompson, S. Fairhurst, V. Raymond, M. Colleoni, D. Davis, H. Estellés, C.-J. Haster, A. Helmling-Cornell, S. Husa, D. Keitel, T. J. Massinger, A. Menéndez-Vázquez, K. Mogushi, S. Os-sokine, E. Payne, G. Pratten, I. Romero-Shaw, J. Sadiq, P. Schmidt, R. Tenorio, R. Udall, J. Veitch, D. Williams, A. B. Yelikar, A. Zimmerman, General-relativistic precession in a black-hole binary, Nature610 (7933) (2022) 652–655. arXiv:2112.11300 ,

doi:10.1038/s41586-022-05212-z .[222] I. M. Romero-Shaw, E. Thrane, P. D. Lasky, When models fail: An introduction to posterior predictive checks and model misspecification in gravitational-wave astronomy, Publ. Astron. Soc. Austral. 39 (2022) e025. arXiv:2202.05479 ,

doi:10.1017/pasa.2022.24 .[223] S. J. Miller, S. Winney, K. Chatziioannou, P. M. Meyers, Posterior Predictive Checks for Gravitational-wave Populations: Limitations and Improvements (4 2026). arXiv:2604.06090 .[224] I. Romero-Shaw, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, J. Calderón Bustillo, GW190521: Orbital Ec-centricity and Signatures of Dynamical Forma-tion in a Binary Black Hole Merger Signal, ApJL903 (1) (2020) L5. arXiv:2009.04771 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/abbe26 .[225] V. Gayathri, J. Healy, J. Lange, B. O’Brien, M. Szczepa´ nczyk, I. Bartos, M. Campanelli, 64 S. Klimenko, C. O. Lousto, R. O’Shaughnessy, Eccentricity estimate for black hole merg-ers with numerical relativity simulations, Nature Astronomy 6 (3) (2022) 344–349. 

doi:10.1038/s41550-021-01568-w .URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41550-021-01568-w 

[226] I. Romero-Shaw, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, Signs of eccentricity in two gravitational-wave signals may indicate a subpopulation of dynamically assembled binary black holes, The Astro-physical Journal Letters 921 (2) (2021) L31. 

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ac3138 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 2041-8213/ac3138 

[227] I. M. Romero-Shaw, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, Four Eccentric Mergers Increase the Evidence that LIGO–Virgo–KAGRA’s Binary Black Holes Form Dynamically, Astrophys. J. 940 (2) (2022) 171. arXiv:2206.14695 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ac9798 .[228] N. Gupte, A. Ramos-Buades, A. Buonanno, J. Gair, M. Coleman Miller, M. Dax, S. R. Green, M. Pürrer, J. Wildberger, J. Macke, I. M. Romero-Shaw, B. Schölkopf, Evidence for eccentricity in the population of binary black holes observed by LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA, Phys. Rev. D112 (10) (2025) 104045. arXiv: 2404.14286 , doi:10.1103/vpyp-nvfp .[229] M. d. L. Planas, A. Ramos-Buades, C. García-Quirós, H. Estellés, S. Husa, M. Haney, Reanalysis of binary black hole gravitational wave events for orbital eccentricity signatures, Phys. Rev. D112 (12) (2025) 123004. arXiv: 2504.15833 , doi:10.1103/cv75-y8dr .[230] I. M. Romero-Shaw, D. Gerosa, N. Loutrel, Eccentricity or spin precession? distinguishing subdominant e ff ects in gravitational-wave data, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical So-ciety 519 (4) (2023) 5352–5357. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 519/4/5352/50423218/stad031.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/stad031 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stad031 

[231] S. J. Miller, M. Isi, K. Chatziioannou, V. Varma, I. Mandel, GW190521: Tracing imprints of spin-precession on the most massive black hole binary, Phys. Rev. D109 (2) (2024) 024024. arXiv: 2310.01544 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.109. 024024 .[232] K. Chatziioannou, R. Cotesta, S. Ghonge, J. Lange, K. K. Y. Ng, J. Calderón Bustillo, J. Clark, C.-J. Haster, S. Khan, M. Pürrer, V. Ray-mond, S. Vitale, N. Afshari, S. Babak, K. Bar-kett, J. Blackman, A. Bohé, M. Boyle, A. Buo-nanno, M. Campanelli, G. Carullo, T. Chu, E. Flynn, H. Fong, A. Garcia, M. Giesler, M. Haney, M. Hannam, I. Harry, J. Healy, D. Hemberger, I. Hinder, K. Jani, B. Kham-ersa, L. E. Kidder, P. Kumar, P. Laguna, C. O. Lousto, G. Lovelace, T. B. Littenberg, L. Lon-don, M. Millhouse, L. K. Nuttall, F. Ohme, R. O’Shaughnessy, S. Ossokine, F. Pannar-ale, P. Schmidt, H. P. Pfei ff er, M. A. Scheel, L. Shao, D. Shoemaker, B. Szilagyi, A. Tarac-chini, S. A. Teukolsky, Y. Zlochower, On the properties of the massive binary black hole merger GW170729, Phys. Rev. D100 (10) (2019) 104015. arXiv:1903.06742 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.100.104015 .[233] R. Abbott, et al., Gwtc-2: Compact binary coa-lescences observed by ligo and virgo during the first half of the third observing run, Phys. Rev. X 11 (2021) 021053. doi:10.1103/PhysRevX. 11.021053 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevX.11.021053 

[234] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, A. Adam, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, L. Albers, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Alléné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Altin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, C. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, J. L. Andrey, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, J. Anna, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, F. Arciprete, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-65 geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Atta-dio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bag-nasco, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Balbi, G. Baldi, N. Baldic-chi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Ba-nagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, K. Baric, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, P. Bar-neo, F. Barone, B. Barr, M. Barrios, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedak-ihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, C. Bellani, L. Bellizzi, D. Beltran-Martinez, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, I. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Bev-eridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, R. Bhatt, A. Bhattacharjee, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, F. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billings-ley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boettner, P. Bogdan, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, V. A. Bonhomme, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bon-nand, A. Borchers, N. Borghi, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, M. Boyle, GW240925 and GW250207: Astrophysical Cal-ibration of Gravitational-wave Detectors, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2605.11703 arXiv:2605. 11703 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2605.11703 .[235] A. G. Abac, R. Abbott, H. Abe, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, N. Ad-hikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, O. D. Aguiar, I. Aguilar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Al-Jodah, C. Alléné, A. Allocca, M. Almualla, P. A. Altin, S. Álvarez-López, A. Amato, L. Amez-Droz, A. Amorosi, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, R. Andersen, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. Andres, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, T. Aposto-latos, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Ap-ple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, K. Aultoneal, S. Babak, A. Badalyan, F. Badaracco, C. Bad-ger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, J. G. Baier, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, P. Baral, J. C. Barayoga, J. Barber, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, S. D. Barthelmy, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, S. Basak, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, A. S. Bell, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, W. Benoit, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, M. Berbel, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, N. Bevins, R. Bhan-dare, A. V. Bhandari, U. Bhardwaj, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, M. Bilicki, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boër, G. Bo-gaert, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Boling-broke, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, G. S. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Braglia, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, M. Breschi, T. Bri-ant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, D. D. Brown, M. L. Brozzetti, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, F. Bucci, J. Buchanan, O. Bulashenko, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, K. Burtnyk, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, G. S. Cabourn Davies, G. Cabras, Search for Eccen-tric Black Hole Coalescences during the Third Observing Run of LIGO and Virgo, ApJ973 (2) (2024) 132. arXiv:2308.03822 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/ad65ce .[236] K. S. Phukon, P. Schmidt, G. Pratten, Geomet-ric template bank for the detection of spinning 66 low-mass compact binaries with moderate or-bital eccentricity, Phys. Rev. D 111 (4) (2025) 043040. arXiv:2412.06433 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.111.043040 .[237] Y.-F. Wang, A. H. Nitz, Search for gravi-tational waves from eccentric binary black holes with an eff ective-one-body template, The Astrophysical Journal 993 (2) (2025) 215. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae0f1b .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/ae0f1b 

[238] S. Schmidt, S. Caudill, J. D. E. Creighton, L. Tsukada, A. Doke, M. Jain, A. Ray, S. Adhi-cary, P. Baral, A. Baylor, K. Cannon, B. Cousins, B. Ewing, H. Fong, R. N. George, P. Godwin, C. Hanna, R. Harada, Y.-J. Huang, R. Huxford, P. Joshi, J. Kennington, S. Kuwahara, A. K. Y. Li, R. Magee, D. Meacher, C. Messick, S. Morisaki, D. Mukherjee, W. Niu, A. Pace, C. Posnan-sky, S. Sachdev, S. Sakon, D. Singh, U. Shah, R. Tapia, T. Tsutsui, K. Ueno, A. Viets, L. Wade, M. Wade, Searching for asymmetric and heav-ily precessing binary black holes in the gravita-tional wave data from the ligo third observing run, Phys. Rev. Lett. 133 (2024) 201401. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.201401 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.133.201401 

[239] I. Harry, C. Hoy, Constraining the neutron star– black hole merger rate, Phys. Rev. D113 (2) (2026) L021305. arXiv:2503.09773 , doi:10. 1103/cqqn-gl4y .[240] E. Berger, Short-Duration Gamma-Ray Bursts, ARA&A52 (2014) 43– 105. arXiv:1311.2603 , doi:10.1146/ annurev-astro-081913-035926 .[241] A. L. Urban, Monsters in the dark: High energy signatures of black hole formation with multi-messenger astronomy, Ph.D. thesis, The Univer-sity of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (2016). [242] S. Countryman, A. Keivani, I. Bartos, Z. Marka, T. Kintscher, R. Corley, E. Blau-fuss, C. Finley, S. Marka, Low-Latency Algorithm for Multi-messenger Astrophysics (LLAMA) with Gravitational-Wave and High-Energy Neutrino Candidates, arXiv e-prints (2019) arXiv:1901.05486 arXiv:1901.05486 ,

doi:10.48550/arXiv.1901.05486 .[243] A. R. Williamson, C. Biwer, S. Fairhurst, I. W. Harry, E. Macdonald, D. Macleod, V. Predoi, Im-proved methods for detecting gravitational waves associated with short gamma-ray bursts, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 122004. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.90.122004 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.90.122004 

[244] P. J. Sutton, G. Jones, S. Chatterji, P. Kalmus, I. Leonor, S. Poprocki, J. Rollins, A. Searle, L. Stein, M. Tinto, M. Was, X-pipeline: an analysis package for autonomous gravitational-wave burst searches, New Journal of Physics 12 (5) (2010) 053034. 

doi:10.1088/1367-2630/12/5/053034 .URL https://doi.org/10.1088/ 1367-2630/12/5/053034 

[245] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, A. Aich, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Al-tin, A. Amato, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. An-derson, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. An-soldi, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aron-son, Y. Asali, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, M. As-siduo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, P. Auf-muth, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, V. Avendano, S. Babak, P. Bacon, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, A. M. Baer, J. Baird, F. Bal-daccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Bals, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, R. S. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, P. Bar-neo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsug-lia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Baz-zan, B. Bécsy, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, D. Beniwal, M. G. Benjamin, J. D. Bent-ley, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, R. Bhandare, A. V. Bhandari, A. Bianchi, J. Bidler, E. Biggs, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, G. Bissenbayeva, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, Y. Boetzel, G. Bogaert, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, 67 V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, J. Bosveld, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, F. Brighenti, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, G. C. Santoro, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, G. Carapella, F. Carbognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, G. Carullo, T. L. Carver, J. C. Diaz, C. Casentini, J. Castañeda, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cav-alieri, G. Cella, P. Cerdá-Durán, E. Cesarini, O. Chaibi, K. Chakravarti, C. Chan, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. A. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatterjee, M. Chaturvedi, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Search for Gravitational Waves Associated with Gamma-Ray Bursts De-tected by Fermi and Swift during the LIGO-Virgo Run O3a, ApJ915 (2) (2021) 86. arXiv:2010. 14550 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abee15 .[246] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adams, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Al-banesi, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, C. Anand, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. An-derson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, T. An-drade, N. Andres, T. Andri´ c, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Ap-pert, K. Arai, K. Arai, Y. Arai, S. Araki, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Aritomi, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Badger, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, L. Baiotti, J. Baird, R. Ba-jpai, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, M. Baz-zan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Be-jger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. Benyaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, R. Birney, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, M. Boldrini, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bouf-fanais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, T. Bulik, H. J. Bul-ten, A. Buonanno, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. Cameron, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, S. Canevarolo, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, Z. Cao, E. Capocasa, E. Capote, G. Carapella, F. Carbognani, J. B. Carlin, M. F. Carney, M. Carpinelli, G. Car-rillo, Search for Gravitational Waves Associ-ated with Gamma-Ray Bursts Detected by Fermi and Swift during the LIGO-Virgo Run O3b, ApJ928 (2) (2022) 186. arXiv:2111.03608 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac532b .[247] M. R. Sinha, T. A. Clarke, Q. Zhang, N. Sarin, E. Thrane, P. D. Lasky, Searching for grav-itational waves from compact binary mergers powering long gamma-ray bursts during LIGO– Virgo–KAGRA’s O3 run, MNRAS549 (1) (2026) stag834. arXiv:2602.05169 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stag834 .[248] J. C. Rastinejad, B. P. Gompertz, A. J. Levan, W.-f. Fong, M. Nicholl, G. P. Lamb, D. B. Male-sani, A. E. Nugent, S. R. Oates, N. R. Tanvir, A. de Ugarte Postigo, C. D. Kilpatrick, C. J. Moore, B. D. Metzger, M. E. Ravasio, A. Rossi, G. Schroeder, J. Jencson, D. J. Sand, N. Smith, J. F. Agüí Fernández, E. Berger, P. K. Blan-chard, R. Chornock, B. E. Cobb, M. De Pasquale, J. P. U. Fynbo, L. Izzo, D. A. Kann, T. Laskar, E. Marini, K. Paterson, A. R. Escorial, H. M. 68 Sears, C. C. Thöne, A kilonova following a long-duration gamma-ray burst at 350 Mpc, Na-ture612 (7939) (2022) 223–227. arXiv:2204. 10864 , doi:10.1038/s41586-022-05390-w .[249] J. C. Rastinejad, W. Fong, C. D. Kilpatrick, M. Nicholl, B. D. Metzger, Uniform Model-ing of Observed Kilonovae: Implications for Diversity and the Progenitors of Merger-driven Long Gamma-Ray Bursts, ApJ979 (2) (2025) 190. arXiv:2409.02158 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ad9c77 .[250] S. E. Gossan, P. Sutton, A. Stuver, M. Zano-lin, K. Gill, C. D. Ott, Observing gravitational waves from core-collapse supernovae in the ad-vanced detector era, Phys. Rev. D93 (4) (2016) 042002. arXiv:1511.02836 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.93.042002 .[251] M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, J. M. Antelis, M. Ben-jamin, M. Cavaglià, D. Gondek-Rosi´ nska, T. Hansen, S. Klimenko, M. D. Morales, C. Moreno, S. Mukherjee, G. Nurbek, J. Pow-ell, N. Singh, S. Sitmukhambetov, P. Szewczyk, O. Valdez, G. Vedovato, J. Westhouse, M. Zano-lin, Y. Zheng, Detecting and reconstructing grav-itational waves from the next galactic core-collapse supernova in the advanced detector era, Phys. Rev. D104 (10) (2021) 102002. arXiv: 2104.06462 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.104. 102002 .[252] M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, Y. Zheng, J. M. Antelis, M. Benjamin, M.-A. Bizouard, A. Casallas-Lagos, P. Cerdá-Durán, D. Davis, D. Gondek-Rosi´ nska, S. Klimenko, C. Moreno, M. Ober-gaulinger, J. Powell, D. Ramirez, B. Ratto, C. Richardson, A. Rijal, A. L. Stuver, P. Szewczyk, G. Vedovato, M. Zanolin, I. Bartos, S. Bhaumik, T. Bulik, M. Drago, J. A. Font, F. De Colle, J. García-Bellido, V. Gayathri, B. Hughey, G. Mitselmakher, T. Mishra, S. Mukherjee, Q. L. Nguyen, M. L. Chan, I. Di Palma, B. J. Piotrzkowski, N. Singh, Optically targeted search for gravitational waves emitted by core-collapse supernovae during the third observing run of Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo, Phys. Rev. D110 (4) (2024) 042007. arXiv:2305.16146 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.042007 .[253] A. G. Abac, R. Abbott, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, S. Adhicary, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, M. Aghaei Abchouyeh, O. D. Aguiar, I. Aguilar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Al-Jodah, C. Alléné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Altin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, A. Amato, L. Amez-Droz, A. Amorosi, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. An-dres, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, L. Argianas, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. As-ton, P. Astone, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. Aultoneal, G. Avallone, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, C. Bad-ger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, E. Bagui, J. G. Baier, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, M. Ball, G. Bal-lardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, P. Baral, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, S. Basak, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, D. E. Bates, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Bay-nard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beir-naert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, V. Benedetto, W. Benoit, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, M. Berbel, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, U. Bhardwaj, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, S. Bhowmick, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Bi-netti, S. Bini, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, A. Boudon, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Braglia, A. Branch, M. Branch-esi, J. Brandt, I. Braun, M. Breschi, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brock-mueller, A. F. Brooks, B. C. Brown, D. D. Brown, M. L. Brozzetti, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, F. Bucci, J. Buchanan, O. Bulashenko, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buo-nanno, K. Burtnyk, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, 69 C. Buy, R. L. Byer, G. S. Cabourn Davies, Search for Gravitational Waves Emitted from SN 2023ixf, ApJ985 (2) (2025) 183. arXiv:2410. 16565 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adc681 .[254] B. Zhang, The physics of fast radio bursts, Reviews of Modern Physics 95 (3) (2023) 035005. arXiv:2212.03972 , doi:10.1103/ RevModPhys.95.035005 .[255] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adams, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Al-banesi, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, C. Anand, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. An-derson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, T. An-drade, N. Andres, T. Andri´ c, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Ap-pert, K. Arai, K. Arai, Y. Arai, S. Araki, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Aritomi, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Badger, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, L. Baiotti, J. Baird, R. Ba-jpai, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Banagiri, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, M. Baz-zan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Be-jger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. Benyaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, I. A. Birney, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, M. Boldrini, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Boumerdassi, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, J. Buchanan, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, R. Bus-cicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Cal-loni, J. Cameron, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, S. Canevarolo, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Can-non, H. Cao, Z. Cao, E. Capocasa, E. Capote, G. Carapella, F. Carbognani, J. B. Carlin, M. F. Carney, Search for Gravitational Waves As-sociated with Fast Radio Bursts Detected by CHIME /FRB during the LIGO–Virgo Observing Run O3a, ApJ955 (2) (2023) 155. arXiv:2203. 12038 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/acd770 .[256] Y.-F. Wang, A. H. Nitz, Search for Coincident Gravitational-wave and Fast Radio Burst Events from 4-OGC and the First CHIME /FRB Cata-log, ApJ937 (2) (2022) 89. arXiv:2203.17222 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac82ae .[257] C. A. Raithel, Constraints on the neutron star equation of state from GW170817, Eu-ropean Physical Journal A 55 (5) (2019) 80. arXiv:1904.10002 , doi:10.1140/epja/ i2019-12759-5 .[258] T. Dietrich, M. W. Coughlin, P. T. H. Pang, M. Bulla, J. Heinzel, L. Issa, I. Tews, S. Antier, Multimessenger constraints on the neutron-star equation of state and the hub-ble constant, Science 370 (6523) (2020) 1450– 1453. arXiv:https://www.science.org/ doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abb4317 , doi: 10.1126/science.abb4317 .URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/ 10.1126/science.abb4317 

[259] B. P. Abbott, et al., Multi-messenger Observa-tions of a Binary Neutron Star Merger, Astro-phys. J. Lett. 848 (2) (2017) L12. arXiv:1710. 05833 , doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa91c9 .[260] R. Margutti, R. Chornock, First Mul-timessenger Observations of a Neu-tron Star Merger, ARA&A59 (2021) 155–202. arXiv:2012.04810 , doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-112420-030742 .[261] G. Ashton, E. Burns, T. D. Canton, T. Dent, H.-B. Eggenstein, A. B. Nielsen, R. Prix, 70 M. Was, S. J. Zhu, Coincident detection significance in multimessenger astronomy, The Astrophysical Journal 860 (1) (2018) 6. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aabfd2 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/aabfd2 

[262] G. Ashton, K. Ackley, I. M. Hernandez, B. Pi-otrzkowski, Current observations are insu ffi -cient to confidently associate the binary black hole merger GW190521 with AGN J124942.3 +

344929, Classical and Quantum Gravity 38 (23) (2021) 235004. arXiv:2009.12346 , doi:10. 1088/1361-6382/ac33bb .[263] I. Magaña Hernandez, V. d’Emilio, S. Morisaki, M. Bhardwaj, A. Palmese, On the Association of GW190425 with Its Potential Electromag-netic Counterpart FRB 20190425A, ApJL971 (1) (2024) L5. arXiv:2404.02496 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ad5b4c .[264] N. Sarin, T. A. Clarke, S. J. Magnall, P. D. Lasky, B. D. Metzger, E. Berger, N. Sridhar, The Origin of the Coherent Radio Flash Potentially Associated with GRB 201006A, ApJL973 (1) (2024) L20. arXiv:2404.08048 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ad74e1 .[265] K. Kotera, J. Silk, Ultrahigh-energy Cosmic Rays and Black Hole Mergers, ApJL823 (2) (2016) L29. arXiv:1602.06961 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8205/823/2/L29 .[266] A. Loeb, Electromagnetic Counterparts to Black Hole Mergers Detected by LIGO, ApJL819 (2) (2016) L21. arXiv:1602.04735 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8205/819/2/L21 .[267] K. Murase, K. Kashiyama, P. Mészáros, I. Shoe-maker, N. Senno, Ultrafast Outflows from Black Hole Mergers with a Minidisk, ApJL822 (1) (2016) L9. arXiv:1602.06938 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8205/822/1/L9 .[268] R. Perna, D. Lazzati, B. Giacomazzo, Short Gamma-Ray Bursts from the Merger of Two Black Holes, ApJL821 (1) (2016) L18. arXiv: 1602.05140 , doi:10.3847/2041-8205/821/ 1/L18 .[269] N. C. Stone, B. D. Metzger, Z. Haiman, As-sisted inspirals of stellar mass black holes em-bedded in AGN discs: solving the ‘final au prob-lem’, MNRAS464 (1) (2017) 946–954. arXiv: 1602.04226 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stw2260 .[270] B. Zhang, Mergers of Charged Black Holes: Gravitational-wave Events, Short Gamma-Ray Bursts, and Fast Radio Bursts, ApJL827 (2) (2016) L31. arXiv:1602.04542 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8205/827/2/L31 .[271] A. Moroianu, L. Wen, C. W. James, S. Ai, M. Ko-valam, F. H. Panther, B. Zhang, An assessment of the association between a fast radio burst and binary neutron star merger, Nature Astronomy 7 (2023) 579–589. arXiv:2212.00201 , doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-01917-x .[272] Q. Chu, E. J. Howell, A. Rowlinson, H. Gao, B. Zhang, S. J. Tingay, M. Boër, L. Wen, Cap-turing the electromagnetic counterparts of binary neutron star mergers through low-latency grav-itational wave triggers, MNRAS459 (1) (2016) 121–139. arXiv:1509.06876 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stw576 .[273] S. Ai, H. Gao, Y. Yuan, B. Zhang, L. Lan, What constraints can one pose on the maxi-mum mass of neutron stars from multimessen-ger observations?, MNRAS526 (4) (2023) 6260– 6273. arXiv:2310.07133 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stad3177 .[274] F. H. Panther, G. E. Anderson, S. Bhandari, A. J. Goodwin, N. Hurley-Walker, C. W. James, A. Kawka, S. Ai, M. Kovalam, A. Moroianu, L. Wen, B. Zhang, The most probable host of CHIME FRB 190425A, associated with binary neutron star merger GW190425, and a late-time transient search, MNRAS519 (2) (2023) 2235– 2250. arXiv:2212.00954 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stac3597 .[275] M. Bhardwaj, D. Michilli, A. Y. Kirichenko, O. Modilim, K. Shin, V. M. Kaspi, B. C. An-dersen, T. Cassanelli, C. Brar, S. Chatterjee, A. M. Cook, F. A. Dong, E. Fonseca, B. M. Gaensler, A. L. Ibik, J. F. Kaczmarek, A. E. Lanman, C. Leung, K. W. Masui, A. Pandhi, A. B. Pearlman, E. Petro ff , Z. Pleunis, J. X. Prochaska, M. Rafiei-Ravandi, K. R. Sand, P. Scholz, K. M. Smith, Host Galaxies for Four Nearby CHIME /FRB Sources and the Local Uni-verse FRB Host Galaxy Population, ApJL971 (2) (2024) L51. arXiv:2310.10018 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ad64d1 .[276] S. J. Smartt, M. Nicholl, S. Srivastav, M. E. Huber, K. C. Chambers, K. W. Smith, D. R. 71 Young, M. D. Fulton, J. L. Tonry, C. W. Stubbs, L. Denneau, A. J. Cooper, A. Aamer, J. P. An-derson, A. Andersson, J. Bulger, T.-W. Chen, P. Clark, T. de Boer, H. Gao, J. H. Gillanders, A. Lawrence, C. C. Lin, T. B. Lowe, E. A. Mag-nier, P. Minguez, T. Moore, A. Rest, L. Shingles, R. Siverd, I. A. Smith, B. Stalder, H. F. Stevance, R. Wainscoat, R. Williams, GW190425: Pan-STARRS and ATLAS coverage of the skymap and limits on optical emission associated with FRB 20190425A, MNRAS528 (2) (2024) 2299– 2307. arXiv:2309.11340 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stae100 .[277] B. McKernan, K. E. S. Ford, I. Bartos, M. J. Graham, W. Lyra, S. Marka, Z. Marka, N. P. Ross, D. Stern, Y. Yang, Ram-pressure stripping of a kicked hill sphere: Prompt electromagnetic emission from the merger of stellar mass black holes in an agn accretion disk, The Astro-physical Journal Letters 884 (2) (2019) L50. 

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab4886 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 2041-8213/ab4886 

[278] J. C. Rodríguez-Ramírez, C. R. Bom, B. Fraga, R. Nemmen, Optical emission model for bi-nary black hole merger remnants travelling through discs of active galactic nuclei, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 527 (3) (2024) 6076–6089. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 527/3/6076/54130328/stad3575.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/stad3575 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stad3575 

[279] M. Graham, K. Ford, B. McKernan, N. Ross, D. Stern, K. Burdge, M. Coughlin, S. Djorgovski, A. Drake, D. Duev, et al., Candidate electromag-netic counterpart to the binary black hole merger gravitational-wave event s190521g, Physical re-view letters 124 (25) (2020) 251102. [280] M. J. Graham, B. McKernan, K. S. Ford, D. Stern, S. Djorgovski, M. Coughlin, K. B. Bur-dge, E. C. Bellm, G. Helou, A. A. Mahabal, et al., A light in the dark: searching for electromagnetic counterparts to black hole–black hole mergers in ligo /virgo o3 with the zwicky transient facility, The Astrophysical Journal 942 (2) (2023) 99. [281] A. Palmese, M. Fishbach, C. J. Burke, J. Annis, X. Liu, Do ligo /virgo black hole mergers produce agn flares? the case of gw190521 and prospects for reaching a confident association, The Astro-physical Journal Letters 914 (2) (2021) L34. [282] N. Veronesi, S. van Velzen, E. M. Rossi, AGN flares as counterparts to LIGO /Virgo mergers: no confident causal connection in spatial corre-lation analysis, MNRAS536 (3) (2025) 3112– 3122. arXiv:2405.05318 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stae2787 .[283] V. Gayathri, J. Healy, J. Lange, B. O’Brien, M. Szczepanczyk, I. Bartos, M. Campanelli, S. Klimenko, C. Lousto, R. O’Shaughnessy, Hubble Constant Measurement with GW190521 as an Eccentric Black Hole Merger, arXiv e-prints (2020) arXiv:2009.14247 arXiv:2009. 14247 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2009.14247 .[284] S. Mukherjee, A. Ghosh, M. J. Graham, C. Karathanasis, M. M. Kasliwal, I. Magaña Her-nandez, S. M. Nissanke, A. Silvestri, B. D. Wan-delt, First measurement of the Hubble parameter from bright binary black hole GW190521, arXiv e-prints (2020) arXiv:2009.14199 arXiv:2009. 14199 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2009.14199 .[285] R. Poggiani, for the LIGO /Virgo Collaboration, The ligo-virgo o3 run and the multi-messenger investigations of compact binary mergers, Annalen der Physik 536 (2) (2024) 2200215. 

arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley. com/doi/pdf/10.1002/andp.202200215 ,

doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/andp. 202200215 .URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ doi/abs/10.1002/andp.202200215 

[286] S. Antier, S. Agayeva, V. Aivazyan, S. Al-ishov, E. Arbouch, A. Baransky, K. Barynova, J. M. Bai, S. Basa, S. Beradze, E. Bertin, J. Berthier, M. Blažek, M. Boër, O. Burkhonov, A. Burrell, A. Cailleau, B. Chabert, J. C. Chen, N. Christensen, A. Coleiro, B. Cordier, D. Corre, M. W. Coughlin, D. Coward, H. Crisp, C. Delattre, T. Dietrich, J.-G. Ducoin, P.-A. Duverne, G. Marchal-Duval, B. Gendre, L. Ey-mar, P. Fock-Hang, X. Han, P. Hello, E. J. Howell, R. Inasaridze, N. Ismailov, D. A. Kann, G. Kapanadze, A. Klotz, N. Kochi-ashvili, C. Lachaud, N. Leroy, A. Le Van Su, W. L. Lin, W. X. Li, P. Lognone, R. Marron, J. Mo, J. Moore, R. Natsvlishvili, K. Noy-sena, S. Perrigault, A. Peyrot, D. Samadov, 72 T. Sadibekova, A. Simon, C. Stachie, J. P. Teng, P. Thierry, C. C. Thöne, Y. Tillayev, D. Turpin, A. de Ugarte Postigo, F. Vachier, M. Vardosanidze, V. Vasylenko, Z. Vidadi, X. F. Wang, C. J. Wang, J. Wei, S. Y. Yan, J. C. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, The first six months of the advanced ligo’s and advanced virgo’s third observing run with grandma, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 492 (3) (2020) 3904–3927. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 492/3/3904/32788222/stz3142.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/stz3142 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stz3142 

[287] S. Antier, S. Agayeva, M. Almualla, S. Aw-iphan, A. Baransky, K. Barynova, S. Beradze, M. Blažek, M. Boër, O. Burkhonov, N. Chris-tensen, A. Coleiro, D. Corre, M. W. Coughlin, H. Crisp, T. Dietrich, J.-G. Ducoin, P.-A. Du-verne, G. Marchal-Duval, B. Gendre, P. Gokul-dass, H. B. Eggenstein, L. Eymar, P. Hello, E. J. Howell, N. Ismailov, D. A. Kann, S. Kar-pov, A. Klotz, N. Kochiashvili, C. Lachaud, N. Leroy, W. L. Lin, W. X. Li, M. Mašek, J. Mo, R. Menard, D. Morris, K. Noysena, N. B. Or-ange, M. Prouza, R. Rattanamala, T. Sadibekova, D. Saint-Gelais, M. Serrau, A. Simon, C. Stachie, C. C. Thöne, Y. Tillayev, D. Turpin, A. de Ugarte Postigo, V. Vasylenko, Z. Vidadi, M. Was, X. F. Wang, J. J. Zhang, T. M. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, GRANDMA observations of advanced LIGO’s and advanced Virgo’s third observa-tional campaign, MNRAS497 (4) (2020) 5518– 5539. arXiv:2004.04277 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/staa1846 .[288] K. Ackley, L. Amati, C. Barbieri, F. E. Bauer, S. Benetti, M. G. Bernardini, K. Bhirombhakdi, M. T. Botticella, M. Branchesi, E. Brocato, S. H. Bruun, M. Bulla, S. Campana, E. Cap-pellaro, A. J. Castro-Tirado, K. C. Chambers, S. Chaty, T.-W. Chen, R. Ciolfi, A. Coleiro, C. M. Copperwheat, S. Covino, R. Cutter, F. D’Ammando, P. D’Avanzo, G. De Cesare, V. D’Elia, M. Della Valle, L. Denneau, M. De Pasquale, V. S. Dhillon, M. J. Dyer, N. Elias-Rosa, P. A. Evans, R. A. J. Eyles-Ferris, A. Fiore, M. Fraser, A. S. Fruchter, J. P. U. Fynbo, L. Gal-bany, C. Gall, D. K. Galloway, F. I. Getman, G. Ghirlanda, J. H. Gillanders, A. Gomboc, B. P. Gompertz, C. González-Fernández, S. González-Gaitán, A. Grado, G. Greco, M. Gromadzki, P. J. Groot, C. P. Gutiérrez, T. Heikkilä, K. E. Heintz, J. Hjorth, Y.-D. Hu, M. E. Huber, C. Inserra, L. Izzo, J. Japelj, A. Jerkstrand, Z. P. Jin, P. G. Jonker, E. Kankare, D. A. Kann, M. Kennedy, S. Kim, S. Klose, E. C. Kool, R. Kotak, H. Kun-carayakti, G. P. Lamb, G. Leloudas, A. J. Levan, F. Longo, T. B. Lowe, J. D. Lyman, E. Magnier, K. Maguire, E. Maiorano, I. Man-del, M. Mapelli, S. Mattila, O. R. McBrien, A. Melandri, M. J. Michałowski, B. Milvang-Jensen, S. Moran, L. Nicastro, M. Nicholl, A. Nicuesa Guelbenzu, L. Nuttal, S. R. Oates, P. T. O’Brien, F. Onori, E. Palazzi, B. Patricelli, A. Perego, M. A. P. Torres, D. A. Perley, E. Pian, G. Pignata, S. Piranomonte, S. Poshyachinda, A. Possenti, M. L. Pumo, J. Quirola-Vásquez, F. Ragosta, G. Ramsay, A. Rau, A. Rest, T. M. Reynolds, S. S. Rosetti, A. Rossi, S. Ross-wog, N. B. Sabha, A. Sagués Carracedo, O. S. Salafia, L. Salmon, R. Salvaterra, S. Savaglio, L. Sbordone, P. Schady, P. Schipani, A. S. B. Schultz, T. Schweyer, S. J. Smartt, K. W. Smith, M. Smith, J. Sollerman, S. Srivastav, E. R. Stan-way, R. L. C. Starling, D. Steeghs, G. Stratta, C. W. Stubbs, N. R. Tanvir, V. Testa, E. Thrane, J. L. Tonry, M. Turatto, K. Ulaczyk, A. J. van der Horst, S. D. Vergani, N. A. Walton, D. Wat-son, K. Wiersema, K. Wiik, Ł. Wyrzykowski, S. Yang, S.-X. Yi, D. R. Young, Observational constraints on the optical and near-infrared emis-sion from the neutron star-black hole binary merger candidate S190814bv, A&A643 (2020) A113. arXiv:2002.01950 , doi:10.1051/ 0004-6361/202037669 .[289] M. W. Coughlin, T. Ahumada, S. Anand, K. De, M. J. Hankins, M. M. Kasliwal, L. P. Singer, E. C. Bellm, I. Andreoni, S. B. Cenko, J. Cooke, C. M. Copperwheat, A. M. Dugas, J. E. Jencson, D. A. Perley, P.-C. Yu, V. Bhalerao, H. Kumar, J. S. Bloom, G. C. Anupama, M. C. B. Ashley, A. Bagdasaryan, R. Biswas, D. A. H. Buckley, K. B. Burdge, D. O. Cook, J. Cromer, V. Cun-ningham, A. D’Aì, R. G. Dekany, A. Delacroix, S. Dichiara, D. A. Duev, A. Dutta, M. Feeney, S. Frederick, P. Gatkine, S. Ghosh, D. A. Gold-stein, V. Z. Golkhou, A. Goobar, M. J. Gra-ham, H. Hanayama, T. Horiuchi, T. Hung, S. W. Jha, A. K. H. Kong, M. Giomi, D. L. Ka-plan, V. R. Karambelkar, M. Kowalski, S. R. 73 Kulkarni, T. Kupfer, F. J. Masci, P. Mazzali, A. M. Moore, M. Mogotsi, J. D. Neill, C.-C. Ngeow, J. Martínez-Palomera, V. La Parola, M. Pavana, E. O. Ofek, A. S. Patil, R. Rid-dle, M. Rigault, B. Rusholme, E. Serabyn, D. L. Shupe, Y. Sharma, A. Singh, J. Soller-man, J. Soon, K. Staats, K. Taggart, H. Tan, T. Travouillon, E. Troja, G. Waratkar, Y. Yatsu, GROWTH on S190425z: Searching Thou-sands of Square Degrees to Identify an Opti-cal or Infrared Counterpart to a Binary Neu-tron Star Merger with the Zwicky Transient Facility and Palomar Gattini-IR, ApJL885 (1) (2019) L19. arXiv:1907.12645 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ab4ad8 .[290] B. P. Gompertz, R. Cutter, D. Steeghs, D. K. Galloway, J. Lyman, K. Ulaczyk, M. J. Dyer, K. Ackley, V. S. Dhillon, P. T. O’Brien, G. Ramsay, S. Poshyachinda, R. Kotak, L. Nut-tall, R. P. Breton, E. Pallé, D. Pollacco, E. Thrane, S. Aukkaravittayapun, S. Awiphan, M. J. I. Brown, U. Burhanudin, P. Chote, A. A. Chrimes, E. Daw, C. Du ff y, R. A. J. Eyles-Ferris, T. Heikkilä, P. Irawati, M. R. Kennedy, T. Killestein, A. J. Levan, S. Littlefair, L. Makry-gianni, T. Marsh, D. Mata Sánchez, S. Mattila, J. Maund, J. McCormac, D. Mkrtichian, Y.-L. Mong, J. Mullaney, B. Müller, A. Obradovic, E. Rol, U. Sawangwit, E. R. Stanway, R. L. C. Starling, P. A. Strøm, S. Tooke, R. West, K. Wiersema, Searching for electromagnetic counterparts to gravitational-wave merger events with the prototype Gravitational-Wave Optical Transient Observer (GOTO-4), MNRAS497 (1) (2020) 726–738. arXiv:2004.00025 , doi:10. 1093/mnras/staa1845 .[291] R. L. Becerra, S. Dichiara, A. M. Watson, E. Troja, N. R. Butler, M. Pereyra, E. Moreno Méndez, F. De Colle, W. H. Lee, A. S. Kutyrev, K. O. C. López, DDOTI obser-vations of gravitational-wave sources discov-ered in O3, MNRAS507 (1) (2021) 1401– 1420. arXiv:2106.15075 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stab2086 .[292] K. Paterson, M. J. Lundquist, J. C. Rastine-jad, W. Fong, D. J. Sand, J. E. Andrews, R. C. Amaro, O. Eskandari, S. Wyatt, P. N. Daly, H. Bradley, S. Zhou-Wright, S. Valenti, S. Yang, E. Christensen, A. R. Gibbs, F. Shelly, C. Bilinski, L. Chomiuk, A. Corsi, M. R. Drout, R. J. Foley, P. Gabor, P. Garnavich, C. J. Grier, E. Hamden, H. Krantz, E. Olszewski, V. Paschalidis, D. Reichart, A. Rest, N. Smith, J. Strader, D. Trilling, C. Veillet, R. M. Wagner, B. Weiner, A. Zabludo ff , Searches after Grav-itational Waves Using ARizona Observatories (SAGUARO): Observations and Analysis from Advanced LIGO /Virgo’s Third Observing Run, ApJ912 (2) (2021) 128. arXiv:2012.11700 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abeb71 .[293] M. Sasada, Y. Utsumi, R. Itoh, N. Tominaga, M. Tanaka, T. Morokuma, K. Yanagisawa, K. S. Kawabata, T. Ohgami, M. Yoshida, F. Abe, R. Adachi, H. Akitaya, Y. Chong, K. Daikuhara, R. Hamasaki, S. Honda, R. Hosokawa, K. Iida, F. Imazato, C. Ishioka, T. Iwasaki, M. Jian, Y. Kamei, T. Kanai, H. Kaneda, A. Kaneko, N. Katoh, N. Kawai, K. Kubota, Y. Kub-ota, H. Mamiya, K. Matsubayashi, K. Mori-hana, K. L. Murata, T. Nagayama, N. Naka-mura, T. Nakaoka, Y. Niino, Y. Nishinaka, M. Niwano, D. Nogami, Y. Oasa, M. Oeda, F. Ogawa, R. Ohsawa, K. Ohta, K. Oide, H. Onozato, S. Sako, T. Saito, Y. Sekiguchi, T. Shigeyama, T. Shigeyoshi, M. Shikauchi, K. Shiraishi, D. Suzuki, K. Takagi, J. Taka-hashi, T. Takarada, M. Takayama, H. Takeuchi, Y. Tamura, R. Tanaka, S. Toma, M. Tozuka, N. Uchida, Y. Uzawa, M. Yamanaka, M. Ya-suda, Y. Yatsu, J-GEM optical and near-infrared follow-up of gravitational wave events during LIGO’s and Virgo’s third observing run, Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics 2021 (5) (2021) 05A104. arXiv:2106. 04842 , doi:10.1093/ptep/ptab007 .[294] S.-W. Chang, C. A. Onken, C. Wolf, L. Luvaul, A. Möller, R. Scalzo, B. P. Schmidt, S. M. Scott, N. Sura, F. Yuan, SkyMapper optical follow-up of gravitational wave triggers: Alert science data pipeline and LIGO /Virgo O3 run, PASA38 (2021) e024. arXiv:2102.07353 , doi:10. 1017/pasa.2021.17 .[295] T. de Jaeger, B. J. Shappee, C. S. Kochanek, K. Z. Stanek, J. F. Beacom, T. W.-S. Holoien, T. A. Thompson, A. Franckowiak, S. Holmbo, ASAS-SN search for optical counterparts of gravitational-wave events from the third ob-serving run of Advanced LIGO /Virgo, MN-RAS509 (3) (2022) 3427–3440. arXiv:2108. 04839 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stab3141 .74 [296] M. M. Kasliwal, S. Anand, T. Ahumada, R. Stein, A. S. Carracedo, I. Andreoni, M. W. Cough-lin, L. P. Singer, E. C. Kool, K. De, H. Ku-mar, M. AlMualla, Y. Yao, M. Bulla, D. Do-bie, S. Reusch, D. A. Perley, S. B. Cenko, V. Bhalerao, D. L. Kaplan, J. Sollerman, A. Goo-bar, C. M. Copperwheat, E. C. Bellm, G. C. Anu-pama, A. Corsi, S. Nissanke, I. Agudo, A. Bag-dasaryan, S. Barway, J. Belicki, J. S. Bloom, B. Bolin, D. A. H. Buckley, K. B. Burdge, R. Burruss, M. D. Caballero-García, C. Can-nella, A. J. Castro-Tirado, D. O. Cook, J. Cooke, V. Cunningham, A. Dahiwale, K. Deshmukh, S. Dichiara, D. A. Duev, A. Dutta, M. Feeney, A. Franckowiak, S. Frederick, C. Fremling, A. Gal-Yam, P. Gatkine, S. Ghosh, D. A. Gold-stein, V. Z. Golkhou, M. J. Graham, M. L. Gra-ham, M. J. Hankins, G. Helou, Y. Hu, W.-H. Ip, A. Jaodand, V. Karambelkar, A. K. H. Kong, M. Kowalski, M. Khandagale, S. R. Kulkarni, B. Kumar, R. R. Laher, K. L. Li, A. Maha-bal, F. J. Masci, A. A. Miller, M. Mogotsi, S. Mohite, K. Mooley, P. Mroz, J. A. New-man, C.-C. Ngeow, S. R. Oates, A. S. Patil, S. B. Pandey, M. Pavana, E. Pian, R. Rid-dle, R. Sánchez-Ramírez, Y. Sharma, A. Singh, R. Smith, M. T. Soumagnac, K. Taggart, H. Tan, A. Tzanidakis, E. Troja, A. F. Valeev, R. Wal-ters, G. Waratkar, S. Webb, P.-C. Yu, B.-B. Zhang, R. Zhou, J. Zolkower, Kilonova Lumi-nosity Function Constraints Based on Zwicky Transient Facility Searches for 13 Neutron Star Merger Triggers during O3, ApJ905 (2) (2020) 145. arXiv:2006.11306 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/abc335 .[297] J. Kim, M. Im, G. S. H. Paek, C.-U. Lee, S.-L. Kim, S.-W. Chang, C. Choi, S. Hwang, W. Kang, S. Kim, T. Kim, H. M. Lee, G. Lim, J. Seo, H.-I. Sung, GECKO Optical Follow-up Observation of Three Binary Black Hole Merger Events: GW190408_181802, GW190412, and GW190503_185404, ApJ916 (1) (2021) 47. arXiv:2105.14902 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac0446 .[298] M. W. Coughlin, T. Dietrich, S. Antier, M. Al-mualla, S. Anand, M. Bulla, F. Foucart, N. Gues-soum, K. Hotokezaka, V. Kumar, G. Raaijmak-ers, S. Nissanke, Implications of the search for optical counterparts during the second part of the Advanced LIGO’s and Advanced Virgo’s third observing run: lessons learned for future follow-up observations, MNRAS497 (1) (2020) 1181– 1196. arXiv:2006.14756 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/staa1925 .[299] J. C. Rastinejad, K. Paterson, W. Fong, D. J. Sand, M. J. Lundquist, G. Hosseinzadeh, E. Christensen, P. N. Daly, A. R. Gibbs, S. Hall, F. Shelly, S. Yang, A Systematic Exploration of Kilonova Candidates from Neutron Star Merg-ers during the Third Gravitational-wave Observ-ing Run, ApJ927 (1) (2022) 50. arXiv:2112. 09701 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac4d34 .[300] A. Sagués Carracedo, M. Bulla, U. Feindt, A. Goobar, Detectability of kilonovae in optical surveys: post-mortem examination of the LVC O3 run follow-up, MNRAS504 (1) (2021) 1294– 1303. arXiv:2004.06137 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stab872 .[301] I. Andreoni, E. C. Kool, A. Sagués Carracedo, M. M. Kasliwal, M. Bulla, T. Ahumada, M. W. Coughlin, S. Anand, J. Sollerman, A. Goo-bar, D. L. Kaplan, T. T. Loveridge, V. Karam-belkar, J. Cooke, A. Bagdasaryan, E. C. Bellm, S. B. Cenko, D. O. Cook, K. De, R. Dekany, A. Delacroix, A. Drake, D. A. Duev, C. Frem-ling, V. Z. Golkhou, M. J. Graham, D. Hale, S. R. Kulkarni, T. Kupfer, R. R. Laher, A. A. Ma-habal, F. J. Masci, B. Rusholme, R. M. Smith, A. Tzanidakis, A. Van Sistine, Y. Yao, Con-straining the Kilonova Rate with Zwicky Tran-sient Facility Searches Independent of Gravita-tional Wave and Short Gamma-Ray Burst Trig-gers, ApJ904 (2) (2020) 155. arXiv:2008. 00008 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abbf4c .[302] M. J. Graham, B. McKernan, K. E. S. Ford, D. Stern, S. G. Djorgovski, M. Coughlin, K. B. Burdge, E. C. Bellm, G. Helou, A. A. Ma-habal, F. J. Masci, J. Purdum, P. Rosnet, B. Rusholme, A Light in the Dark: Search-ing for Electromagnetic Counterparts to Black Hole-Black Hole Mergers in LIGO /Virgo O3 with the Zwicky Transient Facility, ApJ942 (2) (2023) 99. arXiv:2209.13004 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/aca480 .[303] M. D. Fulton, S. J. Smartt, M. E. Huber, K. W. Smith, K. C. Chambers, M. Nicholl, S. Srivas-tav, D. R. Young, E. A. Magnier, C.-C. Lin, P. Minguez, T. de Boer, T. Lowe, R. Wainscoat, 75 Results from the Pan-STARRS search for kilono-vae: contamination by massive stellar outbursts, MNRAS542 (2) (2025) 541–559. arXiv:2506. 07082 , doi:10.1093/mnras/staf1165 .[304] O. M. Boersma, J. van Leeuwen, E. A. K. Adams, B. Adebahr, A. Kutkin, T. Ooster-loo, W. J. G. de Blok, R. van den Brink, A. H. W. M. Coolen, L. Connor, S. Damstra, H. Dénes, K. M. Hess, J. M. van der Hulst, B. Hut, M. Ivashina, G. M. Loose, D. M. Lucero, Y. Maan, Á. Mika, V. A. Moss, H. Mulder, L. C. Oostrum, M. Ruiter, D. van der Schuur, R. Smits, N. J. Vermaas, D. Vohl, J. Ziemke, A search for radio emission from double-neutron star merger GW190425 using Apertif, A&A650 (2021) A131. arXiv:2104.04280 , doi:10. 1051/0004-6361/202140578 .[305] D. Bhakta, K. P. Mooley, A. Corsi, A. Balasubra-manian, D. Dobie, D. A. Frail, G. Hallinan, D. L. Kaplan, S. T. Myers, L. P. Singer, The JAGWAR Prowls LIGO /Virgo O3 Paper I: Radio Search of a Possible Multimessenger Counterpart of the Bi-nary Black Hole Merger Candidate S191216ap, ApJ911 (2) (2021) 77. arXiv:2010.15042 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abeaa8 .[306] K. L. Page, P. A. Evans, A. Tohuvavohu, J. A. Kennea, N. J. Klingler, S. B. Cenko, S. R. Oates, E. Ambrosi, S. D. Barthelmy, A. P. Beard-more, M. G. Bernardini, A. A. Breeveld, P. J. Brown, D. N. Burrows, S. Campana, R. Caputo, G. Cusumano, A. D’Aì, P. D’Avanzo, V. D’Elia, M. De Pasquale, S. W. K. Emery, P. Giommi, C. Gronwall, D. H. Hartmann, H. A. Krimm, N. P. M. Kuin, D. B. Malesani, F. E. Mar-shall, A. Melandri, J. A. Nousek, P. T. O’Brien, J. P. Osborne, C. Pagani, M. J. Page, D. M. Palmer, M. Perri, J. L. Racusin, T. Sakamoto, B. Sbarufatti, J. E. Schlieder, M. H. Siegel, G. Tagliaferri, E. Troja, Swift-XRT follow-up of gravitational wave triggers during the third aLIGO /Virgo observing run, MNRAS499 (3) (2020) 3459–3480. arXiv:2009.13804 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3032 .[307] S. R. Oates, F. E. Marshall, A. A. Breeveld, N. P. M. Kuin, P. J. Brown, M. De Pasquale, P. A. Evans, A. J. Fenney, C. Gronwall, J. A. Ken-nea, N. J. Klingler, M. J. Page, M. H. Siegel, A. Tohuvavohu, E. Ambrosi, S. D. Barthelmy, A. P. Beardmore, M. G. Bernardini, S. Campana, R. Caputo, S. B. Cenko, G. Cusumano, A. D’Aì, P. D’Avanzo, V. D’Elia, P. Giommi, D. H. Hart-mann, H. A. Krimm, S. Laha, D. B. Male-sani, A. Melandri, J. A. Nousek, P. T. O’Brien, J. P. Osborne, C. Pagani, K. L. Page, D. M. Palmer, M. Perri, J. L. Racusin, T. Sakamoto, B. Sbarufatti, J. E. Schlieder, G. Tagliaferri, E. Troja, Swift /UVOT follow-up of gravitational wave alerts in the O3 era, MNRAS507 (1) (2021) 1296–1317. arXiv:2107.12306 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2189 .[308] A. Keivani, J. A. Kennea, P. A. Evans, A. Tohuvavohu, R. Rapisura, S. R. Oates, S. Countryman, I. Bartos, Z. Márka, D. Veske, S. Márka, D. B. Fox, Swift Follow-up Obser-vations of Gravitational-wave and High-energy Neutrino Coincident Signals, ApJ909 (2) (2021) 126. arXiv:2011.01319 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/abdab4 .[309] G. Raman, S. Ronchini, J. Delaunay, A. Tohu-vavohu, J. A. Kennea, T. Parsotan, E. Ambrosi, M. G. Bernardini, S. Campana, G. Cusumano, A. D’Aì, P. D’Avanzo, V. D’Elia, M. de Pasquale, S. Dichiara, P. Evans, D. Hartmann, P. Kuin, A. Melandri, P. O’Brien, J. P. Osborne, K. Page, D. M. Palmer, B. Sbarufatti, G. Tagliaferri, E. Troja, T. V. C. The Ligo Scientific Collab-oration, The Kagra Collaboration, A. G. Abac, R. Abbott, H. Abe, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, O. D. Aguiar, I. Aguilar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Al-Jodah, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, A. Amato, L. Amez-Droz, A. Amorosi, C. Amra, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. Andres, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Ap-pavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, N. Arit-omi, F. Armato, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. As-sis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, K. Aultoneal, G. Avallone, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, E. Bagui, Y. Bai, J. G. Baier, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, P. Baral, J. C. Barayoga, 76 B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, S. D. Barthelmy, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, S. Basak, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Be-jger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, W. Benoit, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, M. Berbel, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, N. Bevins, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhau-mik, S. Bhowmick, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, G. Bogaert, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bon-nand, P. Booker, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, A. Boumerdassi, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, Swift-BAT GUANO Follow-up of Gravitational-wave Trig-gers in the Third LIGO–Virgo–KAGRA Observ-ing Run, ApJ980 (2) (2025) 207. arXiv:2407. 12867 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad9749 .[310] C. Cai, S. L. Xiong, C. K. Li, C. Z. Liu, S. N. Zhang, X. B. Li, L. M. Song, B. Li, S. Xiao, Q. B. Yi, Y. Zhu, Y. G. Zheng, W. Chen, Q. Luo, Y. Huang, X. Y. Song, H. S. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Q. C. Bu, X. L. Cao, Z. Chang, L. Chen, T. X. Chen, Y. B. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. P. Chen, W. W. Cui, Y. Y. Du, G. H. Gao, H. Gao, M. Y. Ge, Y. D. Gu, J. Guan, C. C. Guo, D. W. Han, J. Huo, S. M. Jia, W. C. Jiang, J. Jin, L. D. Kong, G. Li, T. P. Li, W. Li, X. Li, X. F. Li, Z. W. Li, X. H. Liang, J. Y. Liao, B. S. Liu, H. W. Liu, H. X. Liu, X. J. Liu, F. J. Lu, X. F. Lu, T. Luo, R. C. Ma, X. Ma, B. Meng, Y. Nang, J. Y. Nie, G. Ou, J. L. Qu, X. Q. Ren, N. Sai, L. Sun, Y. Tan, L. Tao, Y. L. Tuo, C. Wang, L. J. Wang, P. J. Wang, W. S. Wang, Y. S. Wang, X. Y. Wen, B. B. Wu, B. Y. Wu, M. Wu, G. C. Xiao, Y. P. Xu, R. J. Yang, S. Yang, Y. J. Yang, Y. R. Yang, X. J. Yang, Q. Q. Yin, Y. You, F. Zhang, H. M. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, S. Zhang, W. C. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. F. Zhao, S. J. Zheng, D. K. Zhou, Search for gamma-ray bursts and gravitational wave electro-magnetic counterparts with High Energy X-ray Telescope of Insight-HXMT, MNRAS508 (3) (2021) 3910–3920. arXiv:2109.12270 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2760 .[311] H. Ashkar, F. Brun, M. Füßling, C. Hois-chen, S. Ohm, H. Prokoph, P. Reichherzer, F. Schüssler, M. Seglar-Arroyo, The H.E.S.S. gravitational wave rapid follow-up program, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.2021 (3) (2021) 045. arXiv:2010.16172 , doi:10.1088/ 1475-7516/2021/03/045 .[312] H. Abdalla, F. Aharonian, F. Ait Benkhali, E. O. Angüner, H. Ashkar, M. Backes, V. Bagh-manyan, V. Barbosa Martins, R. Batzofin, Y. Becherini, D. Berge, K. Bernlöhr, B. Bi, M. Böttcher, C. Boisson, J. Bolmont, M. de Bony de Lavergne, R. Brose, F. Brun, T. Bulik, T. Bylund, F. Cangemi, S. Caro ff , S. Casanova, T. Chand, A. Chen, G. Cotter, J. Dama-scene Mbarubucyeye, J. Devin, A. Djannati-Ataï, K. Egberts, J.-P. Ernenwein, S. Fe-gan, A. Fiasson, G. Fichet de Clairfontaine, G. Fontaine, S. Funk, S. Gabici, G. Giavitto, L. Giunti, D. Glawion, J. F. Glicenstein, M.-H. Grondin, J. A. Hinton, M. Hörbe, W. Hof-mann, T. L. Holch, M. Holler, Z. Huang, D. Huber, M. Jamrozy, F. Jankowsky, I. Jung-Richardt, E. Kasai, K. Katarzy´ nski, U. Katz, B. Khélifi, N. Komin, R. Konno, K. Kosack, D. Kostunin, A. Kundu, G. Lamanna, S. Le Stum, A. Lemière, M. Lemoine-Goumard, J.-P. Lenain, F. Leuschner, T. Lohse, A. Luashvili, I. Lypova, J. Mackey, J. Majumdar, D. Maly-shev, V. Marandon, P. Marchegiani, G. Martí-Devesa, R. Marx, G. Maurin, P. J. Meint-jes, A. Mitchell, L. Mohrmann, A. Montanari, E. Moulin, J. Muller, T. Murach, M. de Nau-rois, A. Nayerhoda, J. Niemiec, A. Priyana Noel, P. O’Brien, S. Ohm, L. Olivera-Nieto, E. de Ona Wilhelmi, M. Ostrowski, M. Panter, R. D. Par-sons, G. Peron, V. Poireau, D. A. Prokhorov, H. Prokoph, G. Pühlhofer, M. Punch, A. Quir-renbach, P. Reichherzer, M. Renaud, F. Rieger, G. Rowell, B. Rudak, H. Rueda Ricarte, E. Ruiz-Velasco, V. Sahakian, S. Sailer, H. Salzmann, D. A. Sanchez, A. Santangelo, M. Sasaki, F. Schüssler, H. M. Schutte, U. Schwanke, M. Senniappan, J. N. S. Shapopi, A. Sinha, H. Sol, A. Specovius, S. Spencer, Ł. Stawarz, S. Steinmassl, C. Steppa, L. Sun, T. Taka-hashi, T. Tanaka, R. Terrier, C. Thorpe-Morgan, 77 M. Tsirou, N. Tsuji, Y. Uchiyama, C. van Eldik, J. Veh, J. Vink, S. J. Wagner, F. Werner, R. White, A. Wierzcholska, Y. W. Wong, M. Zacharias, D. Zargaryan, A. A. Zdziarski, A. Zech, S. J. Zhu, S. Zouari, N. ˙ Zywucka, H. E. S. S. Collab-oration, H.E.S.S. Follow-up Observations of Bi-nary Black Hole Coalescence Events during the Second and Third Gravitational-wave Observing Runs of Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo, ApJ923 (1) (2021) 109. arXiv:2112.08307 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac2e04 .[313] O. Adriani, Y. Akaike, K. Asano, Y. Asaoka, E. Berti, G. Bigongiari, W. R. Binns, M. Bongi, P. Brogi, A. Bruno, J. H. Buckley, N. Can-nady, G. Castellini, C. Checchia, M. L. Cherry, G. Collazuol, K. Ebisawa, A. W. Ficklin, H. Fuke, S. Gonzi, T. G. Guzik, T. Hams, K. Hibino, M. Ichimura, K. Ioka, W. Ishizaki, M. H. Israel, K. Kasahara, J. Kataoka, R. Kataoka, Y. Katayose, C. Kato, N. Kawanaka, Y. Kawakubo, K. Kobayashi, K. Kohri, H. S. Krawczynski, J. F. Krizmanic, P. Maestro, P. S. Marrocchesi, A. M. Messi-neo, J. W. Mitchell, S. Miyake, A. A. Moiseev, M. Mori, N. Mori, H. M. Motz, K. Munakata, S. Nakahira, J. Nishimura, G. A. de Nolfo, S. Okuno, J. F. Ormes, N. Ospina, S. Ozawa, L. Pacini, P. Papini, B. F. Rauch, S. B. Ricciarini, K. Sakai, T. Sakamoto, M. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu, A. Shiomi, P. Spillantini, F. Stolzi, S. Sugita, A. Sulaj, M. Takita, T. Tamura, T. Terasawa, S. Torii, Y. Tsunesada, Y. Uchihori, E. Van-nuccini, J. P. Wefel, K. Yamaoka, S. Yanagita, A. Yoshida, K. Yoshida, W. V. Zober, CALET Search for Electromagnetic Counterparts of Gravitational Waves during the LIGO /Virgo O3 Run, ApJ933 (1) (2022) 85. arXiv:2207. 03621 , doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac6f53 .[314] C. Stachie, T. Dal Canton, N. Christensen, M.-A. Bizouard, M. Briggs, E. Burns, J. Camp, M. Coughlin, Searches for Modulated γ-Ray Precursors to Compact Binary Merg-ers in Fermi-GBM Data, ApJ930 (1) (2022) 45. arXiv:2112.04555 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ac5f53 .[315] N. Vieira, J. J. Ruan, D. Haggard, M. R. Drout, M. C. Nynka, H. Boyce, K. Spekkens, S. Safi-Harb, R. G. Carlberg, R. Fernández, A. L. Piro, N. Afsariardchi, D.-S. Moon, A deep cfht optical search for a counterpart to the possible neutron star–black hole merger gw190814, The Astrophysical Journal 895 (2) (2020) 96. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab917d .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab917d 

[316] C. D. Kilpatrick, D. A. Coulter, I. Arcavi, T. G. Brink, G. Dimitriadis, A. V. Filippenko, R. J. Foley, D. A. Howell, D. O. Jones, D. Kasen, M. Makler, A. L. Piro, C. Rojas-Bravo, D. J. Sand, J. J. Swift, D. Tucker, W. Zheng, S. S. Al-lam, J. T. Annis, J. Antilen, T. G. Bachmann, J. S. Bloom, C. R. Bom, K. A. Bostroem, D. Brout, J. Burke, R. E. Butler, M. Butner, A. Campillay, K. E. Clever, C. J. Conselice, J. Cooke, K. C. Dage, R. R. de Carvalho, T. de Jaeger, S. De-sai, A. Garcia, J. Garcia-Bellido, M. S. S. Gill, N. Girish, N. Hallakoun, K. Herner, D. Hira-matsu, D. E. Holz, G. Huber, A. M. Kawash, C. McCully, S. A. Medallon, B. D. Metzger, S. Modak, R. Morgan, R. R. Muñoz, N. Muñoz-Elgueta, Y. S. Murakami, E. Felipe Olivares, A. Palmese, K. C. Patra, M. E. S. Pereira, T. L. Pessi, J. Pineda-Garcia, J. Quirola-Vásquez, E. Ramirez-Ruiz, S. B. Rembold, A. Rest, Ó. Ro-dríguez, L. Santana-Silva, N. F. Sherman, M. R. Siebert, C. Smith, J. A. Smith, M. Soares-Santos, H. Stacey, B. E. Stahl, J. Strader, E. Strasburger, J. Sunseri, S. Tinyanont, B. E. Tucker, N. Ul-loa, S. Valenti, S. S. Vasylyev, M. P. Wies-ner, K. D. Zhang, The Gravity Collective: ASearch for the Electromagnetic Counterpart to the Neutron Star-Black Hole Merger GW190814, ApJ923 (2) (2021) 258. arXiv:2106.06897 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac23c6 .[317] D. L. Tucker, M. P. Wiesner, S. S. Allam, M. Soares-Santos, C. R. Bom, M. Butner, A. Gar-cia, R. Morgan, F. Olivares E., A. Palmese, L. Santana-Silva, A. Shrivastava, J. Annis, J. García-Bellido, M. S. S. Gill, K. Herner, C. D. Kilpatrick, M. Makler, N. Sherman, A. Amara, H. Lin, M. Smith, E. Swann, I. Ar-cavi, T. G. Bachmann, K. Bechtol, F. Berlfein, C. Briceño, D. Brout, R. E. Butler, R. Cartier, J. Casares, H.-Y. Chen, C. Conselice, C. Contr-eras, E. Cook, J. Cooke, K. Dage, C. D’Andrea, T. M. Davis, R. de Carvalho, H. T. Diehl, J. P. Di-etrich, Z. Doctor, A. Drlica-Wagner, M. Drout, B. Farr, D. A. Finley, M. Fishbach, R. J. Foley, F. Förster-Burón, P. Fosalba, D. Friedel, J. Frie-man, C. Frohmaier, R. A. Gruendl, W. G. Hart-ley, D. Hiramatsu, D. E. Holz, D. A. Howell, 78 A. Kawash, R. Kessler, N. Kuropatkin, O. La-hav, A. Lundgren, M. Lundquist, U. Malik, A. W. Mann, J. Marriner, J. L. Marshall, C. E. Martínez-Vázquez, C. McCully, F. Menanteau, N. Meza, G. Narayan, E. Neilsen, C. Nicolaou, R. Nichol, F. Paz-Chinchón, M. E. S. Pereira, J. Pineda, S. Points, J. Quirola-Vásquez, S. Rem-bold, A. Rest, Ó. Rodriguez, A. K. Romer, M. Sako, S. Salim, D. Scolnic, J. A. Smith, J. Strader, M. Sullivan, M. E. C. Swanson, D. Thomas, S. Valenti, T. N. Varga, A. R. Walker, J. Weller, M. L. Wood, B. Yanny, A. Zen-teno, M. Aguena, F. Andrade-Oliveira, E. Bertin, D. Brooks, D. L. Burke, A. Carnero Rosell, M. Carrasco Kind, J. Carretero, M. Costanzi, L. N. da Costa, J. De Vicente, S. Desai, S. Ev-erett, I. Ferrero, B. Flaugher, E. Gaztanaga, D. W. Gerdes, D. Gruen, J. Gschwend, G. Gutierrez, S. R. Hinton, D. L. Hollowood, K. Honscheid, D. J. James, K. Kuehn, M. Lima, M. A. G. Maia, R. Miquel, R. L. C. Ogando, A. Pieres, A. A. Plazas Malagón, M. Rodriguez-Monroy, E. Sanchez, V. Scarpine, M. Schubnell, S. Ser-rano, I. Sevilla-Noarbe, E. Suchyta, G. Tarle, C. To, Y. Zhang, SOAR /Goodman Spectro-scopic Assessment of Candidate Counterparts of the LIGO /Virgo Event GW190814, ApJ929 (2) (2022) 115. arXiv:2109.13351 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/ac5b60 .[318] R. Morgan, et al., Constraints on the Physical Properties of GW190814 through Simulations Based on DECam Follow-up Observations by the Dark Energy Survey, Astrophys. J. 901 (1) (2020) 83. arXiv:2006.07385 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/abafaa .[319] S. de Wet, P. J. Groot, S. Bloemen, R. Le Poole, M. Klein-Wolt, E. Körding, V. McBride, K. Paterson, D. L. A. Pieterse, P. M. Vreeswijk, P. Woudt, GW190814 follow-up with the op-tical telescope MeerLICHT, A&A649 (2021) A72. arXiv:2103.02399 , doi:10.1051/ 0004-6361/202040231 .[320] K. D. Alexander, G. Schroeder, K. Paterson, W. Fong, P. Cowperthwaite, S. Gomez, B. Mar-galit, R. Margutti, E. Berger, P. Blanchard, R. Chornock, T. Eftekhari, T. Laskar, B. D. Met-zger, M. Nicholl, V. A. Villar, P. K. G. Williams, A Late-time Galaxy-targeted Search for the Ra-dio Counterpart of GW190814, ApJ923 (1) (2021) 66. arXiv:2102.08957 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ac281a .[321] D. Dobie, A. Stewart, K. Hotokezaka, T. Mur-phy, D. L. Kaplan, D. A. H. Buckley, J. Cooke, A. Y. Q. Ho, E. Lenc, J. K. Le-ung, M. Gromadzki, A. O’Brien, S. Pintaldi, J. Pritchard, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, A compre-hensive search for the radio counterpart of GW190814 with the Australian Square Kilo-metre Array Pathfinder, MNRAS510 (3) (2022) 3794–3805. arXiv:2109.08452 , doi:10. 1093/mnras/stab3628 .[322] S. Anand, M. W. Coughlin, M. M. Kasliwal, M. Bulla, T. Ahumada, A. Sagués Carracedo, M. Almualla, I. Andreoni, R. Stein, F. Fou-cart, L. P. Singer, J. Sollerman, E. C. Bellm, B. Bolin, M. D. Caballero-García, A. J. Castro-Tirado, S. B. Cenko, K. De, R. G. Dekany, D. A. Duev, M. Feeney, C. Fremling, D. A. Gold-stein, V. Z. Golkhou, M. J. Graham, N. Gues-soum, M. J. Hankins, Y. Hu, A. K. H. Kong, E. C. Kool, S. R. Kulkarni, H. Kumar, R. R. Laher, F. J. Masci, P. Mróz, S. Nissanke, M. Porter, S. Reusch, R. Riddle, P. Rosnet, B. Rusholme, E. Serabyn, R. Sánchez-Ramírez, M. Rigault, D. L. Shupe, R. Smith, M. T. Soumagnac, R. Walters, A. F. Valeev, Optical follow-up of the neutron star-black hole merg-ers S200105ae and S200115j, Nature Astronomy 5 (2021) 46–53. arXiv:2009.07210 , doi:10. 1038/s41550-020-1183-3 .[323] L. He, Z. Liu, R. Niu, B. Gao, M. Zhou, P. Zou, R. Liang, W. Zhao, N. Jiang, Z.-Y. Cai, Z.-G. Dai, Y.-F. Yuan, Tracing the light: Identification for the optical counterpart can-didates of binary black holes during o3, The Astrophysical Journal 990 (2) (2025) 154. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adf284 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/adf284 

[324] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, A. Abe, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, A. Adam, S. Adhicary, D. Ad-hikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggar-wal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, L. Al-bers, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Allene, A. Al-79 locca, S. Al-Shammari, J. A. Alvarez, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Amarasinghe, A. Am-ato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. B. Anand, C. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, F. Andrade-Oliveira, M. Andrés-Carcasona, J. L. Andrey, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, J. Anna, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, T. Aoki, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavu-ravther, E. A. Appelt, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, F. Arciprete, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. As-siduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, P. S. Aswathi, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, N. Avdeev, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bag-nasco, S. Baimukhametova, L. Baiotti, T. Baka, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Balbi, G. Baldi, N. Baldicchi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, M. Bal-lelli, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, K. Baric, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, F. Barone, B. Barr, M. Barrios, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, M. A. Bar-ton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Bay-nard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beir-naert, M. Bejger, A. S. Bell, C. Bellani, D. S. Bel-lie, D. Beltran-Martinez, E. Benedetti, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, I. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, N. Bevins, J. Bezerra-Sobrinho, R. Bhandare, R. Bhatt, A. Bhat-tacharjee, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Biancalana, F. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, M. Bilicki, G. Billingsley, A. Bi-netti, S. Bini, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Bis-coveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, M. Bloch, N. Bode, N. Boettner, P. Bogdan, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, L. D. Bonavena, V. A. Bonhomme, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, N. Borghi, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, T. D. Boybeyi, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, GWTC-5.0: Observations from the Second Part of the Fourth LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA Observing Run and Updates to the Gravitational-Wave Transient Catalog, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2605.27225 arXiv:2605. 27225 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2605.27225 .[325] G. S. H. Paek, M. Im, M. Jeong, S.-W. Chang, M. M. Hur, Y. Hong, S. Kim, J. Lee, D. Lee, S.-H. Lee, J.-H. Jung, J. Kim, H. M. Lee, C.-U. Lee, S.-L. Kim, GECKO Follow-up Ob-servations of the Binary Neutron Star–Black Hole Merger Candidate S230518h, ApJ981 (1) (2025) 38. arXiv:2501.17506 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/adaf99 .[326] T. Ahumada, S. Anand, M. W. Coughlin, V. Gupta, M. M. Kasliwal, V. R. Karambelkar, R. D. Stein, G. Waratkar, V. Swain, T. Je-gou du Laz, A. Anumarlapudi, I. Andreoni, M. Bulla, G. P. Srinivasaragavan, A. Toivonen, A. Wold, E. C. Bellm, S. B. Cenko, D. L. Kaplan, J. Sollerman, V. Bhalerao, D. Perley, A. Salgundi, A. Suresh, K.-R. Hinds, S. Reusch, J. Necker, D. O. Cook, N. Pletskova, L. P. Singer, S. Banerjee, T. Barna, C. M. Copper-wheat, B. Healy, R. W. Kiendrebeogo, H. Kumar, R. Kumar, M. Pezzella, A. Sagués-Carracedo, N. Sravan, J. S. Bloom, T. X. Chen, M. Gra-ham, G. Helou, R. R. Laher, A. A. Maha-bal, J. Purdum, G. C. Anupama, S. Barway, J. Basu, D. Raman, T. Roychowdhury, Searching for Gravitational Wave Optical Counterparts with the Zwicky Transient Facility: Summary of O4a, PASP136 (11) (2024) 114201. arXiv:2405. 12403 , doi:10.1088/1538-3873/ad8265 .[327] M. Pillas, S. Antier, K. Ackley, T. Ahumada, D. Akl, L. de Almeida, S. Anand, C. Andrade, I. Andreoni, K. A. Bostroem, M. Bulla, E. Burns, T. Cabrera, S. Chang, H. Choi, B. O’Connor, M. W. Coughlin, W. Corradi, A. R. Gibbs, T. Dietrich, D. Dornic, J.-G. Ducoin, P.-A. Du-verne, H.-B. Eggenstein, M. Freeberg, M. Dyer, M. Fausnaugh, W.-f. Fong, F. Foucart, D. Frostig, N. Guessoum, V. Gupta, P. Hello, G. Hos-seinzadeh, L. Hu, T. Hussenot-Desenonges, M. Im, R. Jayaraman, M. Jeong, V. Karam-belkar, M. Kasliwal, S. Kim, C. D. Kilpatrick, N. Kochiashvili, S. Karpov, K. Kunnumkai, M. Lamoureux, C. U. Lee, N. Lourie, J. Ly-man, M. Mašek, F. Magnani, G. Mo, M. Molham, A. H. Nitz, M. Nicholl, F. Navarete, K. Noy-sena, D. O’Neill, G. S. H. Paek, A. Palmese, R. Poggiani, T. Pradier, O. Pyshna, Y. Ra-jabov, J. C. Rastinejad, D. J. Sand, P. Shawhan, M. Shrestha, R. Simcoe, S. J. Smartt, D. Steeghs, 80 R. Stein, H. F. Stevance, A. Takey, M. Sun, A. Toivonen, D. Turpin, K. Ulaczyk, A. Wold, T. Wouters, Limits on the ejecta mass during the search for kilonovae associated with neutron star-black hole mergers: A case study of S230518h, GW230529, S230627c and the low-significance candidate S240422ed, Phys. Rev. D112 (8) (2025) 083002. arXiv:2503.15422 , doi:10. 1103/6ld6-95xh .[328] K. Kunnumkai, A. Palmese, M. Bulla, T. Diet-rich, A. M. Farah, P. T. H. Pang, Kilonova emis-sion from GW230529 and mass gap neutron star-black hole mergers, Phys. Rev. D112 (12) (2025) 123005. arXiv:2409.10651 , doi:10.1103/ dnjl-gc4x .[329] S. Ronchini, S. Bala, J. Wood, J. Delaunay, S. Dichiara, J. A. Kennea, T. Parsotan, G. Ra-man, A. Tohuvavohu, N. Adhikari, N. P. Bhat, S. Biscoveanu, E. Bissaldi, E. Burns, S. Cam-pana, K. Chandra, W. H. Cleveland, S. Dalessi, M. De Pasquale, J. García-Bellido, C. Gasbarra, M. M. Giles, I. Gupta, D. Hartmann, B. A. Hris-tov, M. C. Hui, R. Kashyap, D. Kocevski, B. Mai-lyan, C. Malacaria, H. Nakano, G. Principe, O. J. Roberts, B. Sathyaprakash, L. Shao, E. Troja, P. Veres, C. A. Wilson-Hodge, Constraining Pos-sible γ-Ray Burst Emission from GW230529 Us-ing Swift-BAT and Fermi-GBM, ApJL970 (1) (2024) L20. arXiv:2405.10752 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/ad5d74 .[330] T. Cabrera, A. Palmese, L. Hu, B. O’Connor, K. E. S. Ford, B. McKernan, I. Andreoni, T. Ahu-mada, A. Amsellem, M. Busmann, P. Clark, M. W. Coughlin, E. Dadiani, V. Diaz, M. J. Gra-ham, D. Gruen, K. Kunnumkai, J. Postiglione, A. Ri ff eser, J. S. Sommer, F. Valdes, Searching for electromagnetic emission in an AGN from the gravitational wave binary black hole merger can-didate S230922g, Phys. Rev. D110 (12) (2024) 123029. arXiv:2407.10698 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.110.123029 .[331] R. Penrose, Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities, Phys. Rev. Lett.14 (3) (1965) 57–59. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57 .[332] S. Carlip, D.-W. Chiou, W.-T. Ni, R. Woodard, Quantum gravity: A brief history of ideas and some prospects, International Journal of Modern Physics D 24 (11) (2015) 1530028– 331. arXiv:1507.08194 , doi:10.1142/ S0218271815300281 .[333] S. Shankaranarayanan, J. P. Johnson, Modified theories of gravity: Why, how and what?, Gen-eral Relativity and Gravitation 54 (5) (2022) 44. [334] L. Passenger, S. Y. Cheung, N. Guttman, N. Kan-nachel, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, A Gaussian Process Framework for Testing General Rel-ativity with Gravitational Waves, ApJ994 (2) (2025) 202. arXiv:2507.01294 , doi:10. 3847/1538-4357/ae13b0 .[335] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Atta-dio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldic-chi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bar-tos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bel-lie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bent-ley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. 81 Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhandare, S. A. Bhat, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhau-mik, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Binetti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boettner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, GWTC-4.0: Tests of General Relativity. II. Parameterized Tests, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2603.19020 arXiv:2603. 19020 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.19020 .[336] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Altin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Amarasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. As-siduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Attadio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Bad-ger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Ba-jpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldicchi, M. Ball, G. Bal-lardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Bar-man, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Bar-sotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Baylor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Be-dakihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bellie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Bertheas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Bev-eridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, S. Bhag-wat, R. Bhandare, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Bi-netti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boet-tner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bondarescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, E. Brock-mueller, A. F. Brooks, GWTC-4.0: Tests of Gen-eral Relativity. III. Tests of the Remnants, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2603.19021 arXiv:2603. 19021 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.19021 .[337] The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, the KAGRA Collaboration, A. G. Abac, I. Abouelfettouh, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adamcewicz, S. Adhicary, D. Adhikari, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Adkins, S. Afroz, A. Agapito, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, N. Aggarwal, S. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, I.-L. Ahrend, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, S. Albanesi, W. Ali, S. Al-Kershi, C. Al-léné, A. Allocca, S. Al-Shammari, P. A. Al-tin, S. Alvarez-Lopez, W. Amar, O. Ama-rasinghe, A. Amato, F. Amicucci, C. Amra, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Ander-son, M. Andia, M. Ando, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, J. Anglin, S. Ansoldi, J. M. An-telis, S. Antier, M. Aoumi, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Appert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, M. Arca Sedda, J. S. Areeda, N. Aritomi, F. Armato, S. Armstrong, N. Arnaud, M. Aro-geti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, G. Ashton, 82 Y. Aso, L. Asprea, M. Assiduo, S. Assis de Souza Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Atta-dio, F. Aubin, K. AultONeal, G. Avallone, E. A. Avila, S. Babak, C. Badger, S. Bae, S. Bagnasco, L. Baiotti, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, A. M. Baker, K. A. Baker, T. Baker, G. Baldi, N. Baldic-chi, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, T. M. Baptiste, P. Baral, M. Baratti, J. C. Barayoga, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, N. Barman, P. Bar-neo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Bar-suglia, D. Barta, A. M. Bartoletti, M. A. Bar-ton, I. Bartos, A. Basalaev, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, P. Baxi, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, P. A. Baynard, II, M. Bazzan, V. M. Bedak-ihale, F. Beirnaert, M. Bejger, D. Belardinelli, A. S. Bell, D. S. Bellie, L. Bellizzi, W. Benoit, I. Bentara, J. D. Bentley, M. Ben Yaala, S. Bera, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, M. Beroiz, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, T. Berth-eas, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, D. Beveridge, G. Bevilacqua, N. Bevins, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhan-dare, S. A. Bhat, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Bhaumik, V. Biancalana, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, A. Bi-netti, S. Bini, C. Binu, S. Biot, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, S. Blaber, J. K. Blackburn, L. A. Blagg, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, N. Bode, N. Boet-tner, G. Boileau, M. Boldrini, G. N. Boling-broke, A. Bolliand, L. D. Bonavena, R. Bon-darescu, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, M. S. Bonilla, A. Bonino, R. Bonnand, A. Borchers, V. Boschi, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, Y. Bothra, A. Boudon, L. Bourg, M. Boyle, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, I. Braun, T. Briant, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, GWTC-4.0: Tests of General Rel-ativity. I. Overview and General Tests, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2603.19019 arXiv:2603. 19019 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.19019 .[338] R. Abbott, H. Abe, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. K. Ad-kins, V. B. Adya, C. Aff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, T. Akutsu, P. F. de Alarcón, S. Albanesi, R. A. Alfaidi, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, C. Anand, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Ando, T. Andrade, N. Andres, M. Andrés-Carcasona, T. Andri´ c, S. V. An-gelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, T. Apostolatos, E. Z. Appavuravther, S. Ap-pert, S. K. Apple, K. Arai, A. Araya, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Aritomi, N. Arnaud, M. Arogeti, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, H. Asada, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, Y. Aso, M. Assiduo, S. A. D. S. Melo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, K. Aultoneal, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Bad-ger, S. Bae, Y. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bagnasco, Y. Bai, J. Baird, R. Bajpai, T. Baka, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Bal-tus, S. Banagiri, B. Banerjee, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Bar-ton, I. Bartos, S. Basak, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. R. Becher, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, F. Beir-naert, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beniwal, M. G. Benjamin, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. Benyaala, S. Bera, M. Berbel, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, A. V. Bhan-dari, U. Bhardwaj, R. Bhatt, D. Bhattachar-jee, S. Bhaumik, A. Bianchi, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boër, G. Bo-gaert, M. Boldrini, G. N. Bolingbroke, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, F. Bucci, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, K. Burtnyk, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, G. S. C. Davies, G. Cabras, R. Cabrita, L. Cadonati, M. Caesar, Tests of general relativ-ity with GWTC-3, Phys. Rev. D112 (8) (2025) 084080. arXiv:2112.06861 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.112.084080 .[339] D. M. Eardley, D. L. Lee, A. P. Lightman, Gravitational-Wave Observations as a Tool for 83 Testing Relativistic Gravity, Phys. Rev. D8 (10) (1973) 3308–3321. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD. 8.3308 .[340] S. Y. Cheung, L. Passenger, P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, A Search for Extra Polarizations Using a Gaussian Process in Gravitational-wave Transient Catalog 3, ApJ1001 (2) (2026) 130. arXiv:2507.02335 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ae5493 .[341] A. Gupta, K. G. Arun, E. Barausse, L. Bernard, E. Berti, S. A. Bhat, A. Buonanno, V. Cardoso, S. Y. Cheung, T. A. Clarke, S. Datta, A. Dhani, J. María Ezquiaga, I. Gupta, N. Guttman, T. Hin-derer, Q. Hu, J. Janquart, N. K. Johnson-McDaniel, R. Kashyap, N. V. Krishnendu, P. D. Lasky, A. Lundgren, E. Maggio, P. Mahapatra, A. Maselli, P. Narayan, A. B. Nielsen, L. K. Nut-tall, P. Pani, L. Passenger, E. Payne, L. Pom-pili, L. Reali, P. Saini, A. Samajdar, S. Ti-wari, H. Tong, C. Van Den Broeck, K. Yagi, H. Yang, N. Yunes, B. S. Sathyaprakash, Pos-sible Causes of False General Relativity Viola-tions in Gravitational Wave Observations, arXiv e-prints (2024) arXiv:2405.02197 arXiv:2405. 02197 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2405.02197 .[342] E. Maggio, H. O. Silva, A. Buonanno, A. Ghosh, Tests of general relativity in the nonlinear regime: A parametrized plunge-merger-ringdown gravitational waveform model, Phys. Rev. D108 (2) (2023) 024043. arXiv:2212.09655 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108.024043 .[343] P. T. H. Pang, J. C. Bustillo, Y. Wang, T. G. F. Li, Potential observations of false deviations from general relativity in gravitational wave signals from binary black holes, Phys. Rev. D98 (2) (2018) 024019. arXiv:1802.03306 , doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.98.024019 .[344] D. D. Doneva, F. M. Ramazanoˇ glu, H. O. Silva, T. P. Sotiriou, S. S. Yazadjiev, Spontaneous scalarization, Reviews of Modern Physics 96 (1) (2024) 015004. arXiv:2211.01766 , doi:10. 1103/RevModPhys.96.015004 .[345] M. Okounkova, L. C. Stein, J. Moxon, M. A. Scheel, S. A. Teukolsky, Numerical relativ-ity simulation of GW150914 beyond gen-eral relativity, Phys. Rev. D101 (10) (2020) 104016. arXiv:1911.02588 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.101.104016 .[346] C. de Rham, Massive Gravity, Living Reviews in Relativity 17 (1) (2014) 7. arXiv:1401.4173 ,

doi:10.12942/lrr-2014-7 .[347] S. Roy, R. Vicente, J. C. Aurrekoetxea, K. Clough, P. G. Ferreira, Scalar Fields around Black Hole Binaries in LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA, Phys. Rev. Lett.136 (19) (2026) 191402. arXiv: 2510.17967 , doi:10.1103/fv9z-zkxx .[348] B. D. Metzger, L. Hui, M. Cantiello, Frag-mentation in Gravitationally Unstable Collap-sar Disks and Subsolar Neutron Star Mergers, ApJL971 (2) (2024) L34. arXiv:2407.07955 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ad6990 .[349] Y.-X. Chen, B. D. Metzger, Gravitational Insta-bility and Fragmentation in Collapsar Disks Sup-ports the Formation of Subsolar Neutron Stars, ApJL991 (1) (2025) L22. arXiv:2508.17183 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ae045d .[350] C. Hanna, J. Kennington, W. Niu, S. Sakon, D. Singh, S. Adhicary, P. Baral, A. Baylor, K. Cannon, S. Caudill, B. Cousins, J. D. E. Creighton, B. Ewing, H. Fong, R. N. George, P. Godwin, R. Harada, Y.-J. Huang, R. Hux-ford, P. Joshi, S. Kuwahara, A. K. Y. Li, R. Magee, D. Meacher, C. Messick, S. Morisaki, D. Mukherjee, A. Pace, C. Posnansky, A. Ray, S. Sachdev, S. Schmidt, U. Shah, R. Tapia, L. Tsukada, K. Ueno, A. Viets, L. Wade, M. Wade, Z. Yarbrough, N. Zhang, Template bank for subsolar mass compact binary mergers in the fourth observing run of advanced ligo, ad-vanced virgo, and kagra, Phys. Rev. D 112 (2025) 044013. doi:10.1103/c97v-bmj8 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ c97v-bmj8 

[351] Ligo Scientific Collaboration, VIRGO Collaboration, Kagra Collaboration, LIGO /Virgo /KAGRA S251112cm: Identi-fication of a GW compact binary merger candidate, GRB Coordinates Network 42650 (2025) 1. [352] R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ack-ley, C. Adams, N. Adhikari, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, D. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, 84 L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, S. Albanesi, A. Al-locca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, C. Anand, S. Anand, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, T. Andrade, N. Andres, T. Andri´ c, S. V. Angelova, S. Ansoldi, J. M. Antelis, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, M. Arène, N. Arnaud, S. M. Aronson, K. G. Arun, Y. Asali, G. Ashton, M. Assiduo, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, F. Aubin, C. Austin, S. Babak, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, C. Badger, S. Bae, A. M. Baer, S. Bag-nasco, Y. Bai, J. Baird, M. Ball, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, A. Balsamo, G. Baltus, S. Ba-nagiri, D. Bankar, J. C. Barayoga, C. Barbieri, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, P. Barneo, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, M. A. Barton, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, A. C. Bay-lor, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, V. M. Bedakihale, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, V. Benedetto, D. Beni-wal, T. F. Bennett, J. D. Bentley, M. BenYaala, F. Bergamin, B. K. Berger, S. Bernuzzi, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Bet-zwieser, D. Beveridge, R. Bhandare, U. Bhard-waj, D. Bhattacharjee, S. Bhaumik, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, S. Bini, I. A. Birney, O. Birn-holtz, S. Biscans, M. Bischi, S. Biscoveanu, A. Bisht, B. Biswas, M. Bitossi, M.-A. Bi-zouard, J. K. Blackburn, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, F. Bobba, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, M. Boldrini, L. D. Bonavena, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, N. Bose, S. Bose, V. Bossilkov, V. Boudart, Y. Bouf-fanais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, A. Branch, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, M. Breschi, T. Briant, J. H. Briggs, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, J. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, G. Bruno, R. Bruntz, J. Bryant, T. Bulik, H. J. Bul-ten, A. Buonanno, R. Buscicchio, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, L. Cadonati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. C. Bustillo, J. D. Callaghan, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. Cameron, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, S. Canevarolo, M. Cannavacciuolo, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, E. Capote, G. Cara-pella, F. Carbognani, J. B. Carlin, M. F. Car-ney, M. Carpinelli, G. Carrillo, G. Carullo, T. L. Carver, J. C. Diaz, C. Casentini, G. Castaldi, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cava-lieri, M. Ceasar, G. Cella, P. Cerdá-Durán, E. Ce-sarini, W. Chaibi, K. Chakravarti, S. C. Sub-rahmanya, E. Champion, C.-H. Chan, C. Chan, C. L. Chan, K. Chan, K. Chandra, P. Chanial, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. A. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, C. Chatterjee, D. Chatterjee, D. Chat-terjee, M. Chaturvedi, S. Chaty, K. Chatziioan-nou, H. Y. Chen, J. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Cheng, C. K. Cheong, H. Y. Cheung, H. Y. Chia, F. Chiadini, G. Chiarini, R. Chierici, A. Chincarini, M. L. Chiofalo, A. Chiummo, G. Cho, H. S. Cho, R. K. Choud-hary, S. Choudhary, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, S. Chua, K. W. Chung, G. Ciani, P. Ciecielag, M. Cie´ slar, M. Cifaldi, A. A. Ciobanu, R. Ciolfi, F. Cipriano, A. Cirone, F. Clara, E. N. Clark, J. A. Clark, L. Clarke, P. Clearwater, S. Clesse, F. Cleva, E. Coccia, E. Codazzo, P.-F. Cohadon, D. E. Cohen, L. Cohen, M. Colleoni, C. G. Collette, A. Colombo, M. Colpi, C. M. Comp-ton, M. Constancio, L. Conti, S. J. Cooper, P. Corban, T. R. Corbitt, I. Cordero-Carrión, S. Corezzi, K. R. Corley, N. Cornish, D. Corre, A. Corsi, S. Cortese, C. A. Costa, R. Cotesta, M. W. Coughlin, J.-P. Coulon, S. T. Country-man, B. Cousins, P. Couvares, D. M. Coward, M. J. Cowart, D. C. Coyne, R. Coyne, J. D. E. Creighton, T. D. Creighton, A. W. Criswell, M. Croquette, S. G. Crowder, J. R. Cudell, T. J. Cullen, A. Cumming, R. Cummings, L. Cunning-ham, E. Cuoco, M. Curyło, P. Dabadie, T. D. Canton, S. Dall’Osso, G. Dálya, A. Dana, L. M. DaneshgaranBajastani, B. D’Angelo, S. Danil-ishin, S. D’Antonio, K. Danzmann, C. Darsow-Fromm, A. Dasgupta, L. E. H. Datrier, S. Datta, V. Dattilo, I. Dave, M. Davier, G. S. Davies, D. Davis, M. C. Davis, E. J. Daw, R. Dean, D. DeBra, M. Deenadayalan, J. Degallaix, M. De Laurentis, S. Deléglise, V. Del Favero, F. De Lillo, N. De Lillo, W. Del Pozzo, L. M. De-Marchi, F. De Matteis, V. D’Emilio, N. Demos, T. Dent, A. Depasse, R. De Pietri, R. De Rosa, C. De Rossi, R. DeSalvo, R. De Simone, S. Dhu-randhar, M. C. Díaz, M. Diaz-Ortiz, N. A. Didio, T. Dietrich, L. Di Fiore, C. Di Fronzo, C. Di Giorgio, F. Di Giovanni, M. Di Gio-vanni, T. Di Girolamo, A. Di Lieto, B. Ding, S. Di Pace, I. Di Palma, F. Di Renzo, A. K. Di-vakarla, A. Dmitriev, Z. Doctor, L. D’Onofrio, F. Donovan, K. L. Dooley, S. Doravari, I. Dor-rington, M. Drago, J. C. Driggers, Y. Drori, J.-G. Ducoin, P. Dupej, O. Durante, D. D’Urso, P.-A. Duverne, S. E. Dwyer, C. Eassa, P. J. Easter, M. Ebersold, T. Eckhardt, G. Eddolls, B. Edel-85 man, T. B. Edo, O. Edy, A. E ffl er, J. Eichholz, S. S. Eikenberry, M. Eisenmann, R. A. Eisen-stein, A. Ejlli, E. Engelby, L. Errico, R. C. Es-sick, H. Estellés, D. Estevez, Z. Etienne, T. Et-zel, M. Evans, T. M. Evans, B. E. Ewing, V. Fa-fone, H. Fair, S. Fairhurst, A. M. Farah, S. Fari-non, B. Farr, W. M. Farr, N. W. Farrow, E. J. Fauchon-Jones, G. Favaro, M. Favata, M. Fays, M. Fazio, J. Feicht, M. M. Fejer, B. Fekecs, E. Fenyvesi, D. L. Ferguson, A. Fernandez-Galiana, I. Ferrante, T. A. Ferreira, F. Fide-caro, P. Figura, I. Fiori, M. Fishbach, R. P. Fisher, R. Fittipaldi, V. Fiumara, R. Flaminio, E. Floden, H. Fong, J. A. Font, B. Fornal, P. W. F. Forsyth, A. Franke, S. Frasca, F. Fras-coni, C. Frederick, J. P. Freed, Z. Frei, A. Freise, R. Frey, P. Fritschel, V. V. Frolov, G. G. Fronzé, P. Fulda, M. Fy ff e, H. A. Gabbard, B. U. Gadre, J. R. Gair, J. Gais, S. Galaudage, R. Gamba, D. Ganapathy, A. Ganguly, S. G. Gaonkar, B. Garaventa, C. García-Núñez, C. García-Quirós, F. Garufi, B. Gateley, S. Gaudio, V. Gay-athri, G. Gemme, A. Gennai, J. George, O. Ger-berding, L. Gergely, P. Gewecke, S. Ghonge, A. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, S. Ghosh, B. Gi-acomazzo, L. Giacoppo, J. A. Giaime, K. D. Giardina, D. R. Gibson, C. Gier, M. Giesler, P. Giri, F. Gissi, J. Glanzer, A. E. Gleckl, P. Godwin, E. Goetz, R. Goetz, N. Gohlke, B. Goncharov, G. González, A. Gopakumar, M. Gosselin, R. Gouaty, D. W. Gould, B. Grace, A. Grado, M. Granata, V. Granata, A. Grant, S. Gras, P. Grassia, C. Gray, R. Gray, G. Greco, A. C. Green, R. Green, A. M. Gretarsson, E. M. Gretarsson, D. Gri ffi th, W. Gri ffi ths, H. L. Griggs, G. Grignani, A. Grimaldi, S. J. Grimm, H. Grote, S. Grunewald, P. Gruning, D. Guerra, G. M. Guidi, A. R. Guimaraes, G. Guixé, H. K. Gulati, H.-K. Guo, Y. Guo, A. Gupta, A. Gupta, P. Gupta, E. K. Gustafson, R. Gustafson, F. Guz-man, L. Haegel, O. Halim, E. D. Hall, E. Z. Hamilton, G. Hammond, M. Haney, J. Hanks, C. Hanna, M. D. Hannam, O. Hannuksela, H. Hansen, T. J. Hansen, J. Hanson, T. Harder, T. Hardwick, K. Haris, J. Harms, G. M. Harry, I. W. Harry, D. Hartwig, B. Haskell, R. K. Has-skew, C.-J. Haster, K. Haughian, F. J. Hayes, J. Healy, A. Heidmann, A. Heidt, M. C. Heintze, J. Heinze, J. Heinzel, H. Heitmann, F. Hell-man, P. Hello, A. F. Helmling-Cornell, G. Hem-ming, M. Hendry, I. S. Heng, E. Hennes, J. Hen-nig, M. H. Hennig, A. G. Hernandez, F. H. Vivanco, M. Heurs, S. Hild, P. Hill, A. S. Hines, S. Hochheim, D. Hofman, J. N. Hohmann, D. G. Holcomb, N. A. Holland, I. J. Hollows, Z. J. Holmes, K. Holt, D. E. Holz, P. Hopkins, J. Hough, S. Hourihane, E. J. Howell, C. G. Hoy, D. Hoyland, A. Hreibi, Y. Hsu, Y. Huang, M. T. Hübner, A. D. Huddart, B. Hughey, V. Hui, S. Husa, S. H. Huttner, R. Huxford, T. Huynh-Dinh, B. Idzkowski, A. Iess, C. In-gram, M. Isi, K. Isleif, B. R. Iyer, V. Jaberian-Hamedan, T. Jacqmin, S. J. Jadhav, S. P. Jad-hav, A. L. James, A. Z. Jan, K. Jani, J. Jan-quart, K. Janssens, N. N. Janthalur, P. Jara-nowski, D. Jariwala, R. Jaume, A. C. Jenkins, K. Jenner, M. Jeunon, W. Jia, G. R. Johns, A. W. Jones, D. I. Jones, J. D. Jones, P. Jones, R. Jones, R. J. G. Jonker, L. Ju, J. Junker, V. Juste, C. V. Kalaghatgi, V. Kalogera, B. Kamai, S. Kand-hasamy, G. Kang, J. B. Kanner, Y. Kao, S. J. Ka-padia, D. P. Kapasi, S. Karat, C. Karathanasis, S. Karki, R. Kashyap, M. Kasprzack, W. Kas-taun, S. Katsanevas, E. Katsavounidis, W. Katz-man, T. Kaur, K. Kawabe, F. Kéfélian, D. Kei-tel, J. S. Key, S. Khadka, F. Y. Khalili, S. Khan, E. A. Khazanov, N. Khetan, M. Khursheed, N. Kijbunchoo, C. Kim, J. C. Kim, K. Kim, W. S. Kim, Y.-M. Kim, C. Kimball, M. Kinley-Hanlon, R. Kirchho ff , J. S. Kissel, L. Kley-bolte, S. Klimenko, A. M. Knee, T. D. Knowles, E. Knyazev, P. Koch, G. Koekoek, S. Koley, P. Kolitsidou, M. Kolstein, K. Komori, V. Kon-drashov, A. Kontos, N. Koper, M. Korobko, M. Kovalam, D. B. Kozak, V. Kringel, N. V. Kr-ishnendu, A. Królak, G. Kuehn, F. Kuei, P. Kui-jer, A. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Kumar, R. Kumar, K. Kuns, S. Kuwahara, P. Lagabbe, D. Laghi, E. Lalande, T. L. Lam, A. Lamberts, M. Landry, B. B. Lane, R. N. Lang, J. Lange, B. Lantz, I. La Rosa, A. Lartaux-Vollard, P. D. Lasky, M. Laxen, A. Lazzarini, C. Lazzaro, P. Leaci, S. Leavey, Y. K. Lecoeuche, H. M. Lee, H. W. Lee, J. Lee, K. Lee, J. Lehmann, A. Lemaître, N. Leroy, N. Letendre, C. Levesque, Y. Levin, J. N. Leviton, K. Leyde, A. K. Y. Li, B. Li, J. Li, T. G. F. Li, X. Li, F. Linde, S. D. Linker, J. N. Linley, T. B. Littenberg, J. Liu, K. Liu, X. Liu, F. Llamas, M. Llorens-Monteagudo, R. K. L. Lo, A. Lockwood, L. T. London, A. Longo, D. Lopez, M. L. Portilla, M. Lorenzini, V. Lo-riette, M. Lormand, G. Losurdo, T. P. Lott, J. D. Lough, C. O. Lousto, G. Lovelace, J. F. Lucac-cioni, H. Lück, D. Lumaca, A. P. Lundgren, J. E. 86 Lynam, R. Macas, M. MacInnis, D. M. Macleod, I. A. O. MacMillan, A. Macquet, I. M. n. Her-nandez, C. Magazzù, R. M. Magee, R. Mag-giore, M. Magnozzi, S. Mahesh, E. Majorana, C. Makarem, I. Maksimovic, S. Maliakal, A. Ma-lik, N. Man, V. Mandic, V. Mangano, J. L. Mango, G. L. Mansell, M. Manske, M. Man-tovani, M. Mapelli, F. Marchesoni, F. Marion, Z. Mark, S. Márka, Z. Márka, C. Markakis, A. S. Markosyan, A. Markowitz, E. Maros, A. Mar-quina, S. Marsat, F. Martelli, I. W. Martin, R. M. Martin, M. Martinez, V. A. Martinez, V. Mar-tinez, K. Martinovic, D. V. Martynov, E. J. Marx, H. Masalehdan, K. Mason, E. Massera, A. Masserot, T. J. Massinger, M. Masso-Reid, S. Mastrogiovanni, A. Matas, M. Mateu-Lucena, F. Matichard, M. Matiushechkina, N. Mavalvala, J. J. McCann, R. McCarthy, D. E. McClelland, P. K. McClincy, S. McCormick, L. McCuller, G. I. McGhee, S. C. McGuire, C. McIsaac, J. McIver, T. McRae, S. T. McWilliams, D. Meacher, M. Mehmet, A. K. Mehta, Q. Mei-jer, A. Melatos, D. A. Melchor, G. Mendell, A. Menendez-Vazquez, C. S. Menoni, R. A. Mer-cer, L. Mereni, K. Merfeld, E. L. Merilh, J. D. Merritt, M. Merzougui, S. Meshkov, C. Mes-senger, C. Messick, P. M. Meyers, F. Meylahn, A. Mhaske, A. Miani, H. Miao, I. Michaloliakos, C. Michel, H. Middleton, L. Milano, A. Miller, A. L. Miller, B. Miller, M. Millhouse, J. C. Mills, E. Milotti, O. Minazzoli, Y. Minenkov, L. M. Mir, M. Miravet-Tenés, C. Mishra, T. Mishra, T. Mistry, S. Mitra, V. P. Mitrofanov, G. Mit-selmakher, R. Mittleman, G. Mo, E. Moguel, K. Mogushi, S. R. P. Mohapatra, S. R. Mohite, I. Molina, M. Molina-Ruiz, M. Mondin, M. Mon-tani, C. J. Moore, D. Moraru, F. Morawski, A. More, C. Moreno, G. Moreno, S. Morisaki, B. Mours, C. M. Mow-Lowry, S. Mozzon, F. Muciaccia, A. Mukherjee, D. Mukherjee, S. Mukherjee, S. Mukherjee, S. Mukherjee, N. Mukund, A. Mullavey, J. Munch, E. A. Muñiz, P. G. Murray, R. Musenich, S. Muusse, S. L. Nadji, A. Nagar, V. Napolano, I. Nardecchia, L. Naticchioni, B. Nayak, R. K. Nayak, B. F. Neil, J. Neilson, G. Nelemans, T. J. N. Nelson, M. Nery, P. Neubauer, A. Neunzert, K. Y. Ng, S. W. S. Ng, C. Nguyen, P. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, S. A. Nichols, S. Nissanke, E. Nitoglia, F. No-cera, M. Norman, C. North, L. K. Nuttall, J. Oberling, B. D. O’Brien, J. O’Dell, E. Oelker, G. Oganesyan, J. J. Oh, S. H. Oh, F. Ohme, H. Ohta, M. A. Okada, C. Olivetto, R. Oram, B. O’Reilly, R. G. Ormiston, N. D. Ormsby, L. F. Ortega, R. O’Shaughnessy, E. O’Shea, S. Os-sokine, C. Osthelder, D. J. Ottaway, H. Overmier, A. E. Pace, G. Pagano, M. A. Page, G. Pagliaroli, A. Pai, S. A. Pai, J. R. Palamos, O. Palashov, C. Palomba, H. Pan, P. K. Panda, P. T. H. Pang, C. Pankow, F. Pannarale, B. C. Pant, F. H. Pan-ther, F. Paoletti, A. Paoli, A. Paolone, H. Park, W. Parker, D. Pascucci, A. Pasqualetti, R. Pas-saquieti, D. Passuello, M. Patel, M. Pathak, B. Patricelli, A. S. Patron, S. Paul, E. Payne, M. Pedraza, M. Pegoraro, A. Pele, S. Penn, A. Perego, A. Pereira, T. Pereira, C. J. Perez, C. Périgois, C. C. Perkins, A. Perreca, S. Per-riès, J. Petermann, D. Petterson, H. P. Pfeif-fer, K. A. Pham, K. S. Phukon, O. J. Pic-cinni, M. Pichot, M. Piendibene, F. Piergio-vanni, L. Pierini, V. Pierro, G. Pillant, M. Pillas, F. Pilo, L. Pinard, I. M. Pinto, M. Pinto, K. Pi-otrzkowski, M. Pirello, M. D. Pitkin, E. Placidi, L. Planas, W. Plastino, C. Pluchar, R. Pog-giani, E. Polini, D. Y. T. Pong, S. Ponrathnam, P. Popolizio, E. K. Porter, R. Poulton, J. Powell, M. Pracchia, T. Pradier, A. K. Prajapati, K. Pra-sai, R. Prasanna, G. Pratten, M. Principe, G. A. Prodi, L. Prokhorov, P. Prosposito, L. Prudenzi, A. Puecher, M. Punturo, F. Puosi, P. Puppo, M. Pürrer, H. Qi, V. Quetschke, R. Quitzow-James, F. J. Raab, G. Raaijmakers, H. Rad-kins, N. Radulesco, P. Ra ff ai, S. X. Rail, S. Raja, C. Rajan, K. E. Ramirez, T. D. Ramirez, A. Ramos-Buades, J. Rana, P. Rapagnani, U. D. Rapol, A. Ray, V. Raymond, N. Raza, M. Raz-zano, J. Read, L. A. Rees, T. Regimbau, L. Rei, S. Reid, S. W. Reid, D. H. Reitze, P. Relton, A. Renzini, P. Rettegno, M. Rezac, F. Ricci, D. Richards, J. W. Richardson, L. Richard-son, G. Riemenschneider, K. Riles, S. Rinaldi, K. Rink, M. Rizzo, N. A. Robertson, R. Robie, F. Robinet, A. Rocchi, S. Rodriguez, L. Rol-land, J. G. Rollins, M. Romanelli, R. Ro-mano, C. L. Romel, A. Romero-Rodríguez, I. M. Romero-Shaw, J. H. Romie, S. Ronchini, L. Rosa, C. A. Rose, D. Rosi´ nska, M. P. Ross, S. Rowan, S. J. Rowlinson, S. Roy, S. Roy, S. Roy, D. Rozza, P. Ruggi, K. Ryan, S. Sachdev, T. Sadecki, J. Sadiq, M. Sakellariadou, O. S. Salafia, L. Salconi, M. Saleem, F. Salemi, A. Samajdar, E. J. Sanchez, J. H. Sanchez, L. E. Sanchez, N. Sanchis-Gual, J. R. Sanders, A. Sanuy, T. R. Saravanan, N. Sarin, B. Sasso-87 las, H. Satari, B. S. Sathyaprakash, O. Sauter, R. L. Savage, D. Sawant, H. L. Sawant, S. Sayah, D. Schaetzl, M. Scheel, J. Scheuer, M. Schi-worski, P. Schmidt, S. Schmidt, R. Schnabel, M. Schneewind, R. M. S. Schofield, A. Schön-beck, B. W. Schulte, B. F. Schutz, E. Schwartz, J. Scott, S. M. Scott, M. Seglar-Arroyo, D. Sell-ers, A. S. Sengupta, D. Sentenac, E. G. Seo, V. Sequino, A. Sergeev, Y. Setyawati, T. Sha ff er, M. S. Shahriar, B. Shams, A. Sharma, P. Sharma, P. Shawhan, N. S. Shcheblanov, M. Shikauchi, D. H. Shoemaker, D. M. Shoemaker, S. Shyam-Sundar, M. Sieniawska, D. Sigg, L. P. Singer, D. Singh, N. Singh, A. Singha, A. M. Sintes, V. Sipala, V. Skliris, B. J. J. Slagmolen, T. J. Slaven-Blair, J. Smetana, J. R. Smith, R. J. E. Smith, J. Soldateschi, S. N. Somala, E. J. Son, K. Soni, S. Soni, V. Sordini, F. Sorrentino, N. Sorrentino, R. Soulard, T. Souradeep, E. Sow-ell, V. Spagnuolo, A. P. Spencer, M. Spera, R. Srinivasan, A. K. Srivastava, V. Srivastava, K. Staats, C. Stachie, D. A. Steer, J. Stein-lechner, S. Steinlechner, S. Stevenson, D. J. Stops, M. Stover, K. A. Strain, L. C. Strang, G. Stratta, A. Strunk, R. Sturani, A. L. Stuver, S. Sudhagar, V. Sudhir, H. G. Suh, T. Z. Sum-merscales, H. Sun, L. Sun, S. Sunil, A. Sur, J. Suresh, P. J. Sutton, B. L. Swinkels, M. J. Szczepa´ nczyk, P. Szewczyk, M. Tacca, S. C. Tait, C. J. Talbot, C. Talbot, A. J. Tanasijczuk, D. B. Tanner, D. Tao, L. Tao, E. N. T. S. Martín, C. Taranto, J. D. Tasson, R. Tenorio, J. E. Ter-hune, L. Terkowski, M. P. Thirugnanasamban-dam, M. Thomas, P. Thomas, J. E. Thompson, S. R. Thondapu, K. A. Thorne, E. Thrane, S. Ti-wari, S. Tiwari, V. Tiwari, A. M. Toivonen, K. Toland, A. E. Tolley, M. Tonelli, A. Torres-Forné, C. I. Torrie, I. T. e Melo, D. Töyrä, A. Tra-pananti, F. Travasso, G. Traylor, M. Trevor, M. C. Tringali, A. Tripathee, L. Troiano, A. Trovato, L. Trozzo, R. J. Trudeau, D. S. Tsai, D. Tsai, K. W. Tsang, M. Tse, R. Tso, L. Tsukada, D. Tsuna, T. Tsutsui, K. Turbang, M. Turconi, A. S. Ubhi, R. P. Udall, K. Ueno, C. S. Unnikr-ishnan, A. L. Urban, A. Utina, H. Vahlbruch, G. Vajente, A. Vajpeyi, G. Valdes, M. Valen-tini, V. Valsan, N. van Bakel, M. van Beuzekom, J. F. J. van den Brand, C. Van Den Broeck, D. C. Vander-Hyde, L. van der Schaaf, J. V. van Heijningen, J. Vanosky, N. van Remortel, M. Vardaro, A. F. Vargas, V. Varma, M. Vasúth, A. Vecchio, G. Vedovato, J. Veitch, P. J. Veitch, J. Venneberg, G. Venugopalan, D. Verkindt, P. Verma, Y. Verma, D. Veske, F. Vetrano, A. Viceré, S. Vidyant, A. D. Viets, A. Vijayku-mar, V. Villa-Ortega, J.-Y. Vinet, A. Virtuoso, S. Vitale, T. Vo, H. Vocca, E. R. G. von Reis, J. S. A. von Wrangel, C. Vorvick, S. P. Vy-atchanin, L. E. Wade, M. Wade, K. J. Wagner, R. C. Walet, M. Walker, G. S. Wallace, L. Wal-lace, S. Walsh, J. Z. Wang, W. H. Wang, R. L. Ward, J. Warner, M. Was, N. Y. Washington, J. Watchi, B. Weaver, S. A. Webster, M. Wein-ert, A. J. Weinstein, R. Weiss, C. M. Weller, F. Wellmann, L. Wen, P. Weßels, K. Wette, J. T. Whelan, D. D. White, B. F. Whiting, C. Whittle, D. Wilken, D. Williams, M. J. Williams, A. R. Williamson, J. L. Willis, B. Willke, D. J. Wil-son, W. Winkler, C. C. Wipf, T. Wlodarczyk, G. Woan, J. Woehler, J. K. Wo ff ord, I. C. F. Wong, D. S. Wu, D. M. Wysocki, L. Xiao, H. Ya-mamoto, F. W. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, M. J. Yap, D. W. Yeeles, A. B. Yelikar, M. Ying, J. Yoo, H. Yu, H. Yu, A. Zadro˙ zny, M. Zano-lin, T. Zelenova, J.-P. Zendri, M. Zevin, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, G. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Zhou, Z. Zhou, X. J. Zhu, A. B. Zim-merman, M. E. Zucker, J. Zweizig, D. Jeong, S. Shandera, Search for subsolar-mass binaries in the first half of advanced ligo’s and advanced virgo’s third observing run, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129 (2022) 061104. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett. 129.061104 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.129.061104 

[353] LVK Collaboration, Correction to: Search for subsolar-mass black hole binaries in the sec-ond part of Advanced LIGO’s and Advanced Virgo’s third observing run, MNRAS526 (4) (2023) 6234–6234. arXiv:2212.01477 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3120 .[354] K. Kacanja, A. H. Nitz, A search for low-mass neutron stars in the third observ-ing run of advanced ligo and virgo, The Astrophysical Journal 984 (1) (2025) 61. 

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adc9a5 .URL https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/adc9a5 

[355] N. Sarin, P. D. Lasky, The evolution of bi-nary neutron star post-merger remnants: a re-view, General Relativity and Gravitation 53 (6) 88 (2021) 59. arXiv:2012.08172 , doi:10.1007/ s10714-021-02831-1 .[356] T. W. Baumgarte, S. L. Shapiro, M. Shibata, On the Maximum Mass of Di ff erentially Rotat-ing Neutron Stars, ApJL528 (1) (2000) L29– L32. arXiv:astro-ph/9910565 , doi:10. 1086/312425 .[357] S. L. Shapiro, Di ff erential Rotation in Neutron Stars: Magnetic Braking and Viscous Damping, ApJ544 (1) (2000) 397–408. arXiv:astro-ph/ 0010493 , doi:10.1086/317209 .[358] A. Bauswein, T. W. Baumgarte, H.-T. Janka, Prompt Merger Collapse and the Maximum Mass of Neutron Stars, Phys. Rev. Lett.111 (13) (2013) 131101. arXiv:1307.5191 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.111.131101 .[359] K. Hotokezaka, K. Kiuchi, K. Kyutoku, T. Muranushi, Y.-i. Sekiguchi, M. Shibata, K. Taniguchi, Remnant massive neutron stars of binary neutron star mergers: Evolution process and gravitational waveform, Phys. Rev. D88 (4) (2013) 044026. arXiv:1307.5888 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.88.044026 .[360] A. Bauswein, N.-U. F. Bastian, D. B. Blaschke, K. Chatziioannou, J. A. Clark, T. Fischer, M. Oertel, Identifying a first-order phase transi-tion in neutron-star mergers through gravitational waves, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 (2019) 061102. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.061102 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.122.061102 

[361] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Ad-desso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, M. Afrough, B. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agat-suma, N. Aggarwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. Allen, A. Allocca, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Ander-son, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, N. Arnaud, K. G. Arun, S. Ascenzi, G. Ash-ton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, D. V. Atallah, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, A. Avila-Alvarez, S. Babak, P. Bacon, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, P. T. Baker, F. Bal-daccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Bana-giri, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Barclay, B. C. Bar-ish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsuglia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, C. Beer, M. Bejger, I. Belahcene, A. S. Bell, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, J. J. Bero, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, S. Bhagwat, R. Bhandare, I. A. Bilenko, G. Billingsley, C. R. Billman, J. Birch, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, S. Biscov-eanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, C. Biwer, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, N. Bode, M. Boer, G. Bogaert, A. Bohe, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, B. A. Boom, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, K. Bossie, Y. Bouf-fanais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, A. Bril-let, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, J. E. Broida, A. F. Brooks, D. A. Brown, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bu-lik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cado-nati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, P. Canizares, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Car-bognani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cavalieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, P. Cerdá-Durán, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, S. J. Chamberlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charlton, E. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chatter-jee, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, H.-P. Cheng, H. Chia, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, T. Chmiel, H. S. Cho, M. Cho, J. H. Chow, N. Christensen, Q. Chu, A. J. K. Chua, S. Chua, A. K. W. Chung, S. Chung, G. Ciani, R. Ciolfi, Search for Post-merger Grav-itational Waves from the Remnant of the Binary Neutron Star Merger GW170817, ApJL851 (1) (2017) L16. arXiv:1710.09320 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/aa9a35 .[362] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acer-nese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Ad-desso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, C. A ff eldt, B. Agarwal, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, N. Ag-garwal, O. D. Aguiar, L. Aiello, A. Ain, P. Ajith, B. Allen, G. Allen, A. Allocca, M. A. Aloy, P. A. Altin, A. Amato, A. Ananyeva, S. B. Ander-son, W. G. Anderson, S. V. Angelova, S. Antier, S. Appert, K. Arai, M. C. Araya, J. S. Areeda, 89 M. Arène, N. Arnaud, S. Ascenzi, G. Ashton, M. Ast, S. M. Aston, P. Astone, D. V. Atallah, F. Aubin, P. Aufmuth, C. Aulbert, K. AultONeal, C. Austin, A. Avila-Alvarez, S. Babak, P. Ba-con, F. Badaracco, M. K. M. Bader, S. Bae, P. T. Baker, F. Baldaccini, G. Ballardin, S. W. Ballmer, S. Banagiri, J. C. Barayoga, S. E. Bar-clay, B. C. Barish, D. Barker, K. Barkett, S. Bar-num, F. Barone, B. Barr, L. Barsotti, M. Barsug-lia, D. Barta, J. Bartlett, I. Bartos, R. Bassiri, A. Basti, J. C. Batch, M. Bawaj, J. C. Bayley, M. Bazzan, B. Bécsy, C. Beer, M. Bejger, I. Be-lahcene, A. S. Bell, D. Beniwal, M. Bensch, B. K. Berger, G. Bergmann, S. Bernuzzi, J. J. Bero, C. P. L. Berry, D. Bersanetti, A. Bertolini, J. Betzwieser, R. Bhandare, I. A. Bilenko, S. A. Bilgili, G. Billingsley, C. R. Billman, J. Birch, R. Birney, O. Birnholtz, S. Biscans, S. Biscov-eanu, A. Bisht, M. Bitossi, M. A. Bizouard, J. K. Blackburn, J. Blackman, C. D. Blair, D. G. Blair, R. M. Blair, S. Bloemen, O. Bock, N. Bode, M. Boer, Y. Boetzel, G. Bogaert, A. Bohe, F. Bondu, E. Bonilla, R. Bonnand, P. Booker, B. A. Boom, C. D. Booth, R. Bork, V. Boschi, S. Bose, K. Bossie, V. Bossilkov, J. Bosveld, Y. Bou ff anais, A. Bozzi, C. Bradaschia, P. R. Brady, A. Bramley, M. Branchesi, J. E. Brau, T. Briant, F. Brighenti, A. Brillet, M. Brinkmann, V. Brisson, P. Brockill, A. F. Brooks, D. D. Brown, S. Brunett, C. C. Buchanan, A. Buikema, T. Bulik, H. J. Bulten, A. Buonanno, D. Buskulic, C. Buy, R. L. Byer, M. Cabero, L. Cado-nati, G. Cagnoli, C. Cahillane, J. Calderón Bustillo, T. A. Callister, E. Calloni, J. B. Camp, M. Canepa, P. Canizares, K. C. Cannon, H. Cao, J. Cao, C. D. Capano, E. Capocasa, F. Carbog-nani, S. Caride, M. F. Carney, J. Casanueva Diaz, C. Casentini, S. Caudill, M. Cavaglià, F. Cavalier, R. Cavalieri, G. Cella, C. B. Cepeda, P. Cerdá-Durán, G. Cerretani, E. Cesarini, O. Chaibi, S. J. Chamberlin, M. Chan, S. Chao, P. Charl-ton, E. Chase, E. Chassande-Mottin, D. Chat-terjee, B. D. Cheeseboro, H. Y. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Chen, H.-P. Cheng, H. Y. Chia, A. Chincarini, A. Chiummo, T. Chmiel, H. S. Cho, Search for Gravitational Waves from a Long-lived Remnant of the Binary Neutron Star Merger GW170817, ApJ875 (2) (2019) 160. arXiv:1810.02581 ,

doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab0f3d .[363] B. Grace, K. Wette, S. M. Scott, Gravita-tional wave searches for postmerger remnants of gw170817 and gw190425, Phys. Rev. D 110 (2024) 083016. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110. 083016 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.110.083016 

[364] M. H. P. M. van Putten, M. Della Valle, Ob-servational evidence for extended emission to gw170817, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 482 (1) (2018) L46–L49. arXiv:https://academic. oup.com/mnrasl/article-pdf/482/1/ L46/56977596/mnrasl_482_1_l46.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnrasl/sly166 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/ sly166 

[365] M. Aghaei Abchouyeh, M. H. P. M. van Put-ten, L. Amati, Observational Prospects of Dou-ble Neutron Star Mergers and Their Multimes-senger Afterglows: LIGO Discovery Power, Event Rates, and Diversity, ApJ952 (2) (2023) 157. arXiv:2308.07348 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/acd114 .[366] A. Bauswein, H.-T. Janka, K. Hebeler, A. Schwenk, Equation-of-state depen-dence of the gravitational-wave signal from the ring-down phase of neutron-star mergers, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 063001. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.86.063001 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.86.063001 

[367] A. Bauswein, H.-T. Janka, Measuring neutron-star properties via gravitational waves from neutron-star mergers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 011101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.108. 011101 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.108.011101 

[368] K. Hotokezaka, K. Kiuchi, K. Kyutoku, H. Okawa, Y.-i. Sekiguchi, M. Shibata, K. Taniguchi, Mass ejection from the merger of binary neutron stars, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2) (2013) 024001. arXiv:1212.0905 ,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.024001 .[369] K. Takami, L. Rezzolla, L. Baiotti, Constraining the equation of state of neutron stars from binary mergers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 091104. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.091104 .90 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.113.091104 

[370] P. Iosif, N. Stergioulas, Models of binary neutron star remnants with tabulated equa-tions of state, MNRAS510 (2) (2022) 2948– 2967. arXiv:2104.13672 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stab3565 .[371] M. Cassing, L. Rezzolla, Realistic models of general-relativistic di ff erentially rotating stars, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical So-ciety 532 (1) (2024) 945–964. arXiv:https: //academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/ 532/1/945/58389747/stae1527.pdf ,

doi:10.1093/mnras/stae1527 .URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stae1527 

[372] J. A. Clark, A. Bauswein, N. Stergioulas, D. Shoemaker, Observing gravitational waves from the post-merger phase of binary neutron star coalescence, Classical and Quantum Grav-ity 33 (8) (2016) 085003. arXiv:1509.08522 ,

doi:10.1088/0264-9381/33/8/085003 .[373] P. J. Easter, S. Ghonge, P. D. Lasky, A. R. Casey, J. A. Clark, F. Hernandez Vivanco, K. Chatziioannou, Detection and parameter esti-mation of binary neutron star merger remnants, Phys. Rev. D102 (4) (2020) 043011. arXiv: 2006.04396 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.102. 043011 .[374] K. Chatziioannou, J. A. Clark, A. Bauswein, M. Millhouse, T. B. Littenberg, N. Cornish, In-ferring the post-merger gravitational wave emis-sion from binary neutron star coalescences, Phys. Rev. D 96 (2017) 124035. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.96.124035 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.96.124035 

[375] M. Breschi, S. Bernuzzi, K. Chakravarti, A. Camilletti, A. Prakash, A. Perego, Kilohertz gravitational waves from binary neutron star mergers: Numerical-relativity informed post-merger model, Phys. Rev. D 109 (2024) 064009. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.109.064009 .URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevD.109.064009 

[376] M. Punturo, M. Abernathy, F. Acernese, B. Allen, N. Andersson, K. Arun, F. Barone, B. Barr, M. Barsuglia, M. Beker, et al., The Einstein Telescope: a third-generation gravita-tional wave observatory, Classical and Quantum Gravity 27 (19) (2010) 194002. doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/27/19/194002 .[377] K. Ackley, V. B. Adya, P. Agrawal, P. Al-tin, G. Ashton, M. Bailes, et al., Neutron Star Extreme Matter Observatory: A kilohertz-band gravitational-wave detector in the global net-work, PASA37 (2020) e047. arXiv:2007. 03128 , doi:10.1017/pasa.2020.39 .[378] KAGRA Collaboration, T. Akutsu, M. Ando, M. Aoumi, A. Araya, Y. Aso, L. Baiotti, R. Ba-jpai, K. Cannon, A. H.-Y. Chen, D. Chen, H. Chen, A. Chiba, C. Chou, M. Eisenmann, K. Endo, T. Fujimori, S. Garg, D. Haba, S. Haino, R. Harada, H. Hayakawa, K. Hayama, S. Fu-jii, Y. Himemoto, N. Hirata, C. Hirose, H.-F. Hsieh, H.-Y. Hsieh, C. Hsiung, S.-H. Hsu, K. Ide, R. Iden, S. Ikeda, H. Imafuku, R. Ishikawa, Y. Itoh, M. Iwaya, H.-B. Jin, K. Jung, T. Ka-jita, I. Kaku, M. Kamiizumi, N. Kanda, H. Kato, T. Kato, R. Kawamoto, S. Kim, C. Kim, K. Kobayashi, K. Kohri, K. Kokeyama, K. Ko-mori, A. K. H. Kong, T. Koyama, J. Kume, S. Kuroyanagi, S. Kuwahara, K. Kwak, S. Kwon, H. W. Lee, R. Lee, S. Lee, K. L. Li, L. C.-C. Lin, E.-T. -Lin, Y.-C. Lin, G. C. Liu, K. Maeda, M. Meyer-Conde, Y. Michimura, K. Mitsuhashi, O. Miyakawa, S. Miyoki, S. Morisaki, Y. Mori-waki, M. Murakoshi, K. Nakagaki, K. Naka-mura, H. Nakano, T. Narikawa, L. Naticchioni, L. Nguyen Quynh, Y. Nishino, A. Nishizawa, K. Obayashi, M. Ohashi, M. Onishi, K. Oohara, S. Oshino, R. Ozaki, M. A. Page, K.-C. Pan, B.-J. Park, J. Park, F. E. Pena Arel-lano, N. Ruhama, S. Saha, K. Sakai, Y. Sakai, R. Sato, S. Sato, Y. Sato, Y. Sato, T. Sawada, Y. Sekiguchi, N. Sembo, L. Shao, Z.-H. Shi, R. Shimomura, H. Shinkai, S. Singh, K. Somiya, I. Song, H. Sotani, Y. Sudo, K. Suzuki, M. Suzuki, H. Tagoshi, K. Takada, H. Taka-hashi, R. Takahashi, A. Takamori, S. Takano, H. Takeda, K. Takeshita, M. Tamaki, K. Tanaka, S. J. Tanaka, A. Taruya, T. Tomaru, T. To-mura, S. Tsuchida, N. Uchikata, T. Uchiyama, T. Uehara, K. Ueno, T. Ushiba, H. Wang, T. Washimi, C. Wu, H. Wu, K. Yamamoto, T. Yamamoto, T. S. Yamamoto, R. Yamazaki, Y. Yang, S.-W. Yeh, J. Yokoyama, T. Yokozawa, H. Yuzurihara, Z.-C. Zhao, X. Zhu, Z.-H. Zhu, 91 Decadal upgrade strategy for KAGRA toward post-O5 gravitational-wave astronomy, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2508.03392 arXiv:2508. 03392 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.03392 .[379] F. H. Panther, P. D. Lasky, The e ff ect of noise artefacts on gravitational-wave searches for neu-tron star post-merger remnants, MNRAS523 (2) (2023) 2928–2933. arXiv:2303.10847 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1556 .[380] H. Yang, V. Paschalidis, K. Yagi, L. Lehner, F. Pretorius, N. Yunes, Gravitational wave spec-troscopy of binary neutron star merger remnants with mode stacking, Phys. Rev. D97 (2) (2018) 024049. arXiv:1707.00207 , doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.97.024049 .[381] A. W. Criswell, J. Miller, N. Woldemariam, T. Soultanis, A. Bauswein, K. Chatziioannou, M. W. Coughlin, G. Jones, V. Mandic, Nee-dle in a Bayes Stack: a Hierarchical Bayesian Method for Constraining the Neutron Star Equa-tion of State with an Ensemble of Binary Neu-tron Star Post-merger Remnants, arXiv e-prints (2022) arXiv:2211.05250 arXiv:2211.05250 .[382] S. Mitra, P. Tiwari, A. Pai, Prospect of Constraining the EoS of Neutron Stars Using Post-Merger Signals, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2505.21667 arXiv:2505.21667 ,

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2505.21667 .[383] F. H. Panther, P. D. Lasky, Sub-threshold post-merger gravitational waves can constrain the hot nuclear equation of state, MNRAS548 (4) (2026) stag750. arXiv:2512.08497 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stag750 .[384] A. W. Criswell, J. Miller, N. Woldemariam, T. Soultanis, A. Bauswein, K. Chatziioannou, M. W. Coughlin, G. Jones, V. Mandic, Hier-archical Bayesian method for constraining the neutron star equation of state with an ensem-ble of binary neutron star postmerger remnants, Phys. Rev. D107 (4) (2023) 043021. arXiv: 2211.05250 , doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.107. 043021 .[385] L.-G. Zhu, X. Chen, Evidence of a Fraction of LIGO /Virgo /KAGRA Events Coming from Active Galactic Nuclei, ApJL989 (1) (2025) L15. arXiv:2505.02924 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/adf31f .[386] Y.-J. Li, Y.-Z. Wang, S.-P. Tang, Y.-Z. Fan, Aligned Hierarchical Black Hole Mergers in AGN disks revealed by GWTC-4, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2509.23897 arXiv:2509. 23897 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.23897 .[387] N. Veronesi, S. van Velzen, E. M. Rossi, K. Storey-Fisher, Constraining the AGN forma-tion channel for detected black hole binary merg-ers up to z = 1.5 with the Quaia catalogue, MN-RAS536 (1) (2025) 375–386. arXiv:2407. 21568 , doi:10.1093/mnras/stae2575 .[388] E. Grishin, S. Gilbaum, N. C. Stone, The e ff ect of thermal torques on AGN disc migration traps and gravitational wave populations, MNRAS530 (2) (2024) 2114–2132. arXiv:2307.07546 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae828 .[389] J. W. N. Moncrie ff , F. H. Panther, Connecting the hierarchically merging binary black hole pop-ulation to their host galaxies, MNRAS543 (2) (2025) 1833–1841. arXiv:2508.18704 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1582 .[390] X. Chen, W.-B. Han, Extreme-mass-ratio in-spirals produced by tidal capture of binary black holes, Communications Physics 1 (1) (2018) 53. arXiv:1801.05780 , doi:10.1038/ s42005-018-0053-0 .[391] P. Peng, A. Franchini, M. Bonetti, A. Sesana, X. Chen, The fate of emri-imri pairs in agn accre-tion disks: hydrodynamic and three body simula-tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16070 (2024). [392] L. Zwick, J. Takátsy, P. Saini, K. Hendriks, J. Samsing, C. Tiede, C. Rowan, A. A. Trani, En-vironmental e ff ects in stellar mass gravitational wave sources i: Expected fraction of signals with significant dephasing in the dynamical and agn channels, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24084 (2025). [393] R. Perna, D. Lazzati, M. Cantiello, Electromag-netic Signatures of Relativistic Explosions in the Disks of Active Galactic Nuclei, ApJL906 (2) (2021) L7. arXiv:2011.08873 , doi:10. 3847/2041-8213/abd319 .[394] E. Grishin, A. Bobrick, R. Hirai, I. Mandel, H. B. Perets, Supernova explosions in active galactic nuclear discs, MNRAS507 (1) (2021) 156–174. arXiv:2105.09953 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stab1957 .92 [395] M. Cantiello, A. S. Jermyn, D. N. C. Lin, Stellar Evolution in AGN Disks, ApJ910 (2) (2021) 94. arXiv:2009.03936 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/abdf4f .[396] B. McKernan, K. E. S. Ford, M. Cantiello, M. Graham, A. S. Jermyn, N. W. C. Leigh, T. Ryu, D. Stern, Starfall: a heavy rain of stars in ’turning on’ AGN, MNRAS514 (3) (2022) 4102– 4110. arXiv:2110.03741 , doi:10.1093/ mnras/stac1310 .[397] N. Jiang, Z. Pan, Embers of Active Galac-tic Nuclei: Tidal Disruption Events and Quasiperiodic Eruptions, ApJL983 (1) (2025) L18. arXiv:2503.17609 , doi:10.3847/ 2041-8213/adc456 .[398] Z. Lyu, Z. Pan, J. Mao, N. Jiang, H. Yang, Science opportunities of wet extreme mass-ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev. D113 (4) (2026) 043002. arXiv:2501.03252 , doi:10.1103/ 337c-g6x1 .[399] D. Laghi, N. Tamanini, W. Del Pozzo, A. Sesana, J. Gair, S. Babak, D. Izquierdo-Villalba, Gravitational-wave cosmology with extreme mass-ratio inspirals, MNRAS508 (3) (2021) 4512–4531. arXiv:2102.01708 , doi:10. 1093/mnras/stab2741 .[400] D. Scolnic, A. G. Riess, Y. S. Murakami, E. R. Peterson, D. Brout, M. Acevedo, B. Carreres, D. O. Jones, K. Said, C. Howlett, G. S. Anand, The Hubble Tension in Our Own Backyard: DESI and the Nearness of the Coma Cluster, ApJL979 (1) (2025) L9. arXiv:2409.14546 ,

doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ada0bd .[401] Ž. Ivezi´ c, S. M. Kahn, J. A. Tyson, B. Abel, E. Acosta, R. Allsman, D. Alonso, Y. AlSayyad, S. F. Anderson, J. Andrew, J. R. P. Angel, G. Z. Angeli, R. Ansari, P. Antilogus, C. Araujo, R. Armstrong, K. T. Arndt, P. Astier, É. Aubourg, N. Auza, T. S. Axelrod, D. J. Bard, J. D. Barr, A. Barrau, J. G. Bartlett, A. E. Bauer, B. J. Bau-man, S. Baumont, E. Bechtol, K. Bechtol, A. C. Becker, J. Becla, C. Beldica, S. Bellavia, F. B. Bianco, R. Biswas, G. Blanc, J. Blazek, R. D. Blandford, J. S. Bloom, J. Bogart, T. W. Bond, M. T. Booth, A. W. Borgland, K. Borne, J. F. Bosch, D. Boutigny, C. A. Brackett, A. Brad-shaw, W. N. Brandt, M. E. Brown, J. S. Bul-lock, P. Burchat, D. L. Burke, G. Cagnoli, D. Cal-abrese, S. Callahan, A. L. Callen, J. L. Carlin, E. L. Carlson, S. Chandrasekharan, G. Charles-Emerson, S. Chesley, E. C. Cheu, H.-F. Chi-ang, J. Chiang, C. Chirino, D. Chow, D. R. Cia-rdi, C. F. Claver, J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. J. Cock-rum, R. Coles, A. J. Connolly, K. H. Cook, A. Cooray, K. R. Covey, C. Cribbs, W. Cui, R. Cutri, P. N. Daly, S. F. Daniel, F. Daruich, G. Daubard, G. Daues, W. Dawson, F. Del-gado, A. Dellapenna, R. de Peyster, M. de Val-Borro, S. W. Digel, P. Doherty, R. Dubois, G. P. Dubois-Felsmann, J. Durech, F. Economou, T. Eifler, M. Eracleous, B. L. Emmons, A. Fausti Neto, H. Ferguson, E. Figueroa, M. Fisher-Levine, W. Focke, M. D. Foss, J. Frank, M. D. Freemon, E. Gangler, E. Gawiser, J. C. Geary, P. Gee, M. Geha, C. J. B. Gessner, R. R. Gib-son, D. K. Gilmore, T. Glanzman, W. Glick, T. Goldina, D. A. Goldstein, I. Goodenow, M. L. Graham, W. J. Gressler, P. Gris, L. P. Guy, A. Guyonnet, G. Haller, R. Harris, P. A. Hascall, J. Haupt, F. Hernandez, S. Herrmann, E. Hile-man, J. Hoblitt, J. A. Hodgson, C. Hogan, J. D. Howard, D. Huang, M. E. Hu ff er, P. Ingraham, W. R. Innes, S. H. Jacoby, B. Jain, F. Jammes, M. J. Jee, T. Jenness, G. Jernigan, D. Jevremovi´ c, K. Johns, A. S. Johnson, M. W. G. Johnson, R. L. Jones, C. Juramy-Gilles, M. Juri´ c, J. S. Kali-rai, N. J. Kallivayalil, B. Kalmbach, J. P. Kantor, P. Karst, M. M. Kasliwal, H. Kelly, R. Kessler, V. Kinnison, D. Kirkby, L. Knox, I. V. Kotov, V. L. Krabbendam, K. S. Krugho ff , P. Kubánek, J. Kuczewski, S. Kulkarni, J. Ku, N. R. Kurita, C. S. Lage, R. Lambert, T. Lange, J. B. Lang-ton, L. Le Guillou, D. Levine, M. Liang, K.-T. Lim, C. J. Lintott, K. E. Long, M. Lopez, P. J. Lotz, R. H. Lupton, N. B. Lust, L. A. MacArthur, A. Mahabal, R. Mandelbaum, T. W. Markiewicz, D. S. Marsh, P. J. Marshall, S. Mar-shall, M. May, R. McKercher, M. McQueen, J. Meyers, M. Migliore, M. Miller, D. J. Mills, LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference De-sign and Anticipated Data Products, ApJ873 (2) (2019) 111. arXiv:0805.2366 , doi:10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab042c .[402] R. Gray, F. Beirnaert, C. Karathanasis, B. Revenu, C. Turski, A. Chen, T. Baker, S. Vallejo, A. E. Romano, T. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, K. Leyde, S. Mastrogiovanni, S. More, Joint cosmological and gravitational-wave population inference using dark sirens and galaxy cata-logues, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.2023 (12) 93 (2023) 023. arXiv:2308.02281 ,

doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2023/12/023 .94