Title: The kinetic-energy bottleneck in Fast Radio Burst models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25035v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:05:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> Draft version June 25, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

The kinetic-energy bottleneck in Fast Radio Burst models 

Paz Beniamini 1, 2, 3 and Pawan Kumar 4

> 1Department of Natural Sciences, The Open University of Israel, P.O Box 808, Ra’anana 4353701, Israel
> 2Astrophysics Research Center of the Open university (ARCO), The Open University of Israel, P.O Box 808, Ra’anana 4353701, Israel
> 3Department of Physics, The George Washington University, 725 21st Street NW, Washington, DC 20052, USA
> 4Department of Astronomy, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA

ABSTRACT Most Fast Radio Burst (FRB) models invoke a two-step process in which energy released by the central engine is converted into particle kinetic energy and only subsequently radiated as coherent GHz emission. We derive model-independent constraints on FRB emission mechanisms and use them to infer the density, size, and particle Lorentz factor of the emitting region. We assess the implications for the three main classes of FRB models. (i) Inner-magnetospheric models violate brightness-temperature and kinetic-luminosity constraints unless particles are continuously re-accelerated in situ. Magnetar-strength magnetic fields can supply the required parallel electric field out to 𝑅 ≲ 10 10 , cm with additional, model-dependent constraints. The monster-shock scenario provides such continuous acceleration, but requires particle densities exceeding the Goldreich-Julian value by ≳ 10 12 ,shifting the maser peak to ≳ 10 3 GHz for typical FRB luminosities. (ii) Light-cylinder-scale forced-reconnection provides continuous particle acceleration but the radio energy emitted from the compressed reconnection layer is typically only ≲ 10 −6 of the injected energy. (iii) External-shock maser models satisfy kinetic-luminosity and brightness-temperature constraints. However, we show that the upstream wind is unavoidably optically thick to induced Compton scattering, independent of the model’s principal parameters. Proposed escape routes -emission above the maser peak or upstream magnetization 𝜎 w ≳ 30 - lead to tiny efficiencies, while the former also conflicts with narrow FRB spectra. We conclude that magnetospheric models operating near the neutron-star surface and incorporating continuous particle acceleration remain the most promising FRB emission scenario, subject to successful wave escape from the magnetosphere (discussed in the Introduction). 

Keywords: fast radio bursts – stars: neutron – stars: magnetars – radiation mechanisms: non-thermal – shock waves 

1. INTRODUCTION A common requirement underlies all proposed mechanisms for Fast Radio Burst (FRB) emission: regardless of the spe-cific microphysical process or the location of the emission site, the energy powering the burst must be carried in kinetic form, by a relativistic particle beam or bulk flow, at the point where coherent radiation is produced. This requirement emerges across three broad classes of models, distinguished primarily by their emission radius, and imposes stringent constraints on the generation, transport, and dissipation of kinetic energy in any viable FRB source. 

> Corresponding author: Paz Beniamini pazb@openu.ac.il

Magnetospheric mechanisms for FRB emission divide broadly into categories distinguished by how coherence is achieved. In coherent-antenna scenarios (Sturrock 1971; Ru-derman & Sutherland 1975; Buschauer & Benford 1976; Cordes 1979; Kumar et al. 2017; Yang & Zhang 2018; Lu & Kumar 2018; Wadiasingh & Timokhin 2019; Kumar & Bošnjak 2020; Cooper & Wijers 2021; Cooper & Wadias-ingh 2024), particles are organized into bunches by an ex-ternal driver - for example, charge-starvation gaps, Alfvén waves, magnetic reconnection structures, or current sheets -and emit coherent curvature or related radiation as they propa-gate along curved field lines. In plasma maser scenarios (Lyu-tikov 2021), coherent emission arises through beam-plasma instabilities such as Cherenkov-drift, cyclotron-Cherenkov, and related mechanisms, originally developed in the contexts of laser-plasma physics and coherent radio emission from or-dinary pulsars. A third subclass invokes inverse Compton 

> arXiv:2606.25035v1 [astro-ph.HE] 23 Jun 2026

2scattering of low-frequency magnetospheric waves by charge bunches (Zhang 2022), with the scattering process replacing the direct radiation mechanism. Despite differences in mi-crophysics, all three classes share a common architecture: a relativistic particle beam is launched at some inner location, propagates to a distinct emission site, and converts a fraction of its kinetic energy into coherent radio. In each case, the achievable radio luminosity scales with the kinetic energy density of the beam at the emission site. In intermediate scenarios, such as forced magnetic recon-nection near the light cylinder (Lyubarsky 2020; Mahlmann et al. 2022), magnetic free energy serves as the ultimate reser-voir but is first converted into an MHD wave which escapes to outside the light-cylinder where it triggers reconnection. A fraction of the dissipated energy released by reconnec-tion can accelerate particles and then be converted to radio waves. Similarly, in far-away blast-wave models, such as synchrotron maser emission at ultra-relativistic magnetized shocks (Lyubarsky 2014; Beloborodov 2017, 2019; Metzger et al. 2019; Margalit et al. 2020b), the burst energy is trans-ported outward as the bulk kinetic energy of a relativistic shell and a small fraction of it is converted into coherent radio emission downstream of the shock. In this case the ob-served luminosity directly reflects the instantaneous kinetic energy flux of the ejecta at the emission radius. While plasma beam models were primarily formulated and validated in the pulsar context, their application to FRBs represents a major, and qualitative, departure. Cos-mological FRBs reach isotropic equivalent luminosities of 

𝐿 FRB ≈ 10 41 − 10 43 erg s −1, exceeding those of radio pulsars by ∼ 12 orders of magnitude in luminosity and brightness temperature. This enormous gap means that beam particles must lose energy on extremely short timescales, and that the magnetosphere must supply and sustain energy fluxes with no pulsar analogue. In other words, even if mechanisms known from pulsar physics can in principle operate, we must first ver-ify that the FRB source can generate and deliver the required kinetic power to the emission site. The constraints derived in this paper are complementary to a growing body of observational work that has sought to lo-calize the FRB emission region. Frequency-time downward drifting (the “sad trombone" effect) observed in many re-peaters has been interpreted as radius-to-frequency mapping along curved magnetic field lines (e.g. Hessels et al. 2019), suggesting an origin in a strongly magnetized environment close to the central engine. Strong temporal variability on microseconds or less (Majid et al. 2021; Nimmo et al. 2021; Snelders et al. 2023; Hewitt et al. 2023) and sharp spectral features down to a few MHz in width ( Δ𝜈 /𝜈 ≪ 1; Shannon et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2025) imply a compact emitting region (Beniamini & Kumar 2020; Kumar et al. 2024b). Scintilla-tion analysis has placed direct upper limits on the transverse source size of ≲ 3 × 10 4 km (Kumar et al. 2024a; Nimmo et al. 2025), constraining models in which radio emission is produced far from the compact object. Rapid polarization-angle variations of bursts, including both smooth swings and abrupt jumps (Niu et al. 2024; Mckinven et al. 2025; Man-aswini et al. 2026), have likewise been argued to reflect an ordered magnetic geometry associated with the central en-gine (Beniamini & Kumar 2025; Qu et al. 2026). Together, these observations suggest that the emission may originate in a compact region close to the central engine, possibly within or just outside the light cylinder. At the same time, identifying the emission site does not uniquely determine the underlying emission mechanism. Even within the framework of near-engine models, consid-erable effort has been devoted to understanding whether co-herent GHz radiation generated deep in a magnetar magneto-sphere can escape. Beloborodov (2021), for example, argued that escape is strongly inhibited by enhanced scattering and dissipation once the background magnetic field becomes com-parable to the magnetic field of the wave itself. Other studies (e.g. Qu et al. 2022; Lyutikov 2024; Qu & Kumar 2026) have reached a different conclusion, finding that the waves can es-cape along open magnetic field lines and may even clear a path for their own propagation by accelerating and sweeping aside the surrounding plasma. Moreover, the dipolar magnetic-field geometry often assumed in escape calculations may not ap-ply during an FRB, when the magnetosphere is expected to be strongly disturbed. In such scenarios, Alfvén waves launched during the event can steepen in the outer magnetosphere and open magnetic field lines, producing a configuration closer to a split monopole. Likewise, a weak precursor or the lead-ing edge of a bright pulse may accelerate ambient plasma to highly relativistic speeds along the magnetic field, creating a relatively clean channel through which the remainder of the burst can propagate. Thus, while current observations favor compact near-engine emission, the interpretation remains de-bated. Moreover, significant uncertainties remain regarding both the emission process itself and the conditions required for the radiation to escape. Motivated by these considerations, we ask here a more gen-eral question: what kinematic and energetic constraints must any coherent emission mechanism satisfy? We find that the energy bottleneck identified here arises generically across a broad class of models including nearby and far-away mod-els and is largely independent of the detailed microphysics responsible for generating the observed radio emission.  

> 2.

PARTICLE BEAM REQUIREMENTS Consider a cold particle beam with Lorentz factor (LF) 

𝛾 𝑗 , particle mass 𝑚 , and number density 𝑛 measured in the neutron-star frame. Its isotropic-equivalent kinetic luminos-3ity is 

𝐿 𝑗 = 4𝜋𝑅 2𝑚𝑛𝛾 𝑗 𝑐 3. (1) In the context of neutron-star magnetospheres, it is instruc-tive to compare the densities to the Goldreich-Julian value (Goldreich & Julian 1969) 

𝑛 GJ ≈ Ω𝐵 0

𝑒𝑐𝜋 

 𝑅 0

𝑅 

3

∼ 2.2 × 10 14 cm −3 𝐵 0,15 Ω1

 𝑅 0

𝑅 

3

. (2) where 𝑅 0, Ω and 𝐵 0 are the radius, rotation frequency and surface B-field strength of a neutron star, and 𝑅 is the distance to the center of the star. We denote by 𝜉 = 𝑛 /𝑛 GJ ≥ 1 the multiplicity factor. For e + − 𝑒 − flows, 𝜉 grows through pair cascades and represents the number of pairs produced per primary particle. Theoretical studies of polar cap cascades in rotation-powered pulsars, incorporating curvature radiation, synchrotron radiation, and resonant inverse Compton scatter-ing, establish a robust upper limit of 𝜉 ≲ few × 10 5 (Harding & Muslimov 2011; Timokhin & Harding 2019). Outer gap models yield lower values, 𝜉 ≲ 10 4 (Hirotani 2006). For magnetar-strength fields, 𝐵 ≳ 10 14 G, additional QED pro-cesses, such as magnetic photon splitting, can suppress pair creation, although the degree of suppression depends on the still-debated question of which polarization modes participate in the splitting (Baring & Harding 2001; Harding et al. 2025). Within the twisted magnetosphere framework (Beloborodov & Thompson 2007; Beloborodov 2013) pair avalanches are driven by electric currents flowing along closed field loops, sustained by crustal shearing of the magnetic field. The re-sulting charge densities can exceed the Goldreich-Julian value by factors of 𝜉 ∼ 10 2 − 10 6 depending on the twist angle and loop geometry. Recent Monte Carlo cascade simulations in this context, which self-consistently include one-photon pair production, photon splitting, and resonant inverse Compton scattering on closed magnetar field loops, find multiplicities of 𝜉 ∼ 10 − 10 3 per primary when radiative energy losses are accounted for, rising to 𝜉 ∼ 10 4 − 10 5 when such losses are neglected (Harding et al. 2025). Below we consider 𝜉 ≲ 10 5

as a conservative upper limit. In the beam rest frame, the causally connected length scale is 𝑅 /𝛾 𝑗 , and the energy contained within this region is 𝛿𝜖 ′ 

> 𝑗

∼ 4𝜋𝑅 3𝑚𝑛𝑐 2/𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

. This energy cannot be dissipated faster than the light-crossing time 𝑅 /( 𝑐𝛾 𝑗 ), corresponding to an observer-frame duration 𝛿𝑡 obs ∼ 𝑅 /( 𝑐𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

). Even assum-ing 100% efficiency, the maximum observable luminosity is therefore 𝛾 𝑗 𝛿𝜖 ′ 

> 𝑗

/𝛿𝑡 obs ∼ 4𝜋𝑅 2𝑚𝑛𝑐 3𝛾 𝑗 , up to factors of order unity. This limit can be exceeded only if beam energy is tem-porarily stored in a region much smaller than the beam itself and radiated on its light-crossing time. However, plasma-maser models for FRBs typically assume that the beam excites waves that propagate outward and occupy an increasing vol-ume, rather than being spatially compressed. Consequently, the luminosity estimated above is a generous upper bound that applies generically to beam-driven plasma models. If a fraction 𝜀 rad of the observer frame beam power emerges as coherent GHz emission, the resulting radio luminosity is 

𝐿 rad ∼ 4𝜋𝜀 rad 𝑅 2𝑚𝑛𝑐 3𝛾 𝑗 ≈ 3 × 10 36 erg s −1𝜀 rad 𝑅 29 𝑛 10 𝛾 𝑗, 3

= 6.8 × 10 36 erg s −1𝜀 rad 𝑅 −19 𝐵 0,15 Ω1𝜉 5𝛾 𝑗, 3. (3) While this can easily accommodate the range of radio lu-minosities observed in pulsars 𝐿 rad ∼ 10 28 − 10 31 erg s −1

(Manchester et al. 2005), it falls many orders of magnitude below typical FRB luminosities ( 𝐿 FRB ∼ 10 42 erg s −1 and up to 10 45 erg s −1 in some cases), even for magnetospheric emis-sion with 𝜉 = 10 5, from close to the neutron star surface and before accounting for the typically low efficiency of ra-dio emission expected in FRB models (i.e. normalizing by 

𝜀 rad = 1 above). A second way of expressing the kinetic beam constraint is in terms of the brightness temperature. An observer detecting a burst of duration 𝑡 FRB would infer a brightness temperature 

𝑇 𝐵 ∼ 𝜀 rad 𝑅 2 𝑚𝑛𝛾 𝑗 𝑐 3 

> 2𝑘 𝐵 𝜈 3𝑡 2FRB

∼ 9 × 10 29 K 𝜀 rad 𝑅 29 𝑛 10 𝛾 𝑗, 3 

> 𝜈 39𝑡 2FRB ,−3

= 2 × 10 30 K 𝜀 rad 𝐵 0,15 Ω1 𝜉 5 𝛾 𝑗, 3  

> 𝜈 39𝑡 2FRB ,−3𝑅 9

. (4) The source’s relativistic motion toward the observer does not affect the inferred 𝑇 𝐵 , since bulk motion does not enter into the observationally inferred 𝑇 𝐵 . Instead, the true brightness temperature in the compact-object rest frame and in the source comoving frame, however, depends strongly on 𝛾 𝑗 .Observed FRBs reach brightness temperatures as large as 

𝑇 𝐵 ∼ 10 37 K. Even adopting the optimistic value 𝜀 rad ∼ 10 −2,beam-powered magnetospheric emission falls short by more than seven orders of magnitude. Reproducing the observed 

𝑇 𝐵 would instead require 𝛾 𝑗 ∼ 10 10 , which is unphysical. By contrast, beam-driven plasma masers readily account for radio pulsars, for which 𝑇 B,obs ∼ 10 25 K (however, crab nano-shots reach 𝑇 𝐵 comparable to FRBs - the constraints on their underlying emission are discussed further in §3.2), well within the bound implied by Eq. 4. The analysis of 𝐿 rad and 𝑇 B already assumes that particles lose their kinetic energy on the dynamical timescale 𝑅 /( 𝑐𝛾 𝑗 )

in the comoving frame, yet this proves insufficient by orders of magnitude. The only apparent remedy would be for particles to transfer their energy to plasma waves on a timescale shorter than the comoving dynamical time by a factor of ∼ 3 × 10 5,while simultaneously being re-accelerated in situ by a field-aligned electric field to prevent their LFs from decreasing. An independent and direct way to see the need for re-accelerating particles goes as follows. Considering the typical isotropic equivalent luminosity and duration of FRBs, we can estimate the isotropic equivalent energy that powered the burst 

𝜖 j,iso ∼ 𝐿 FRB 𝑡 FRB 𝜀 −1rad ≈ 10 39 𝐿 FRB ,42 𝑡 FRB ,−3𝜀 −1rad erg where 𝜀 rad 4is the radiative efficiency in the observer frame. At the same time, the energy per electron is 𝛾 𝑗 𝑚𝑐 2. Thus, if there is no re-acceleration of electrons during the FRB emission, then the required isotropic equivalent electron number is 

𝑁 req e,iso =

(10 42 𝐿 FRB ,42 𝑡 FRB ,−3𝛾 −1

> 𝑗, 3

𝜀 −1rad 𝛾 𝑗 𝜃 𝑗 > 110 42 𝐿 FRB ,42 𝑡 FRB ,−3𝛾 −1

> 𝑗, 3

𝜀 −1rad (𝛾 𝑗 𝜃 𝑗 )−2 𝛾 𝑗 𝜃 𝑗 < 1 (5) where 𝜃 𝑗 is the opening angle of the beam, and the second line shows that for narrow beams and a fixed observed luminosity, the inferred 𝑁 req e,iso increases even further. Typically, for real-istic coherent emission mechanisms, we expect 𝜀 rad ≲ 10 −3

and therefore 𝑁 req e,iso > 10 45 . This is much larger than the number of electrons within the entire magnetosphere of a NS, 

𝑁 mag ≈ 4𝜋 

3 𝜉𝑛 GJ (𝑅 LC )𝑅 3LC ≈ 10 38 𝜉 5 𝐵 0,15 Ω1 ≪ 𝑁 req e,iso . (6) This simple counting argument directly shows that for any plausible value of 𝜉 , magnetospheric and intermediate FRB emission models must involve re-acceleration to reproduce the observed radiation. This shortcoming illustrated by the luminosity and bright-ness temperature constraints can also be expressed in terms of the cooling-time. The reasoning, provided below, arrives at the same conclusion expressed differently, in a way which brings to the front the per-particle energetics and motivates the bunch-size estimates that follow. Instead of asking how much energy is available within a causally connected region, we now ask how quickly an individual particle must radiate to sustain the observed luminosity. We find that the required timescale is so short as to be physically untenable. The emission from a single particle within the beaming cone of opening angle 𝛾 −1 

> 𝑗

is boosted in the observer frame according to 𝑃 obs = 𝑃 ′

> em

𝛾 4 

> 𝑗

, where 𝑃 em = 𝑃 ′ 

> em

is the Lorentz invariant emitted power. Allowing for coherent emission from bunches - where ‘bunch’ denotes any localized region of particles whose emission adds in phase, sustained over the radiation timescale of interest rather than over the dy-namical lifetime of the source - the isotropic-equivalent ob-served luminosity is 𝐿 rad = 𝑁 2 𝑁 b 𝑃 obs where 𝑁 is the number of emitting electrons per bunch, and 𝑁 b is the number of bunches within the beaming cone. We note that objections raised in the pulsar context regarding the dynamical fragility of bunches (Melrose 1978; Lyubarsky 2008) are significantly altered with regards to FRB emission, which is a transient phenomenon: bunches need at most to persist over a single FRB duration, not over rotation periods. The total isotropic equivalent number of electrons that are radiating at a fixed observer time is 𝑁 tot ,iso ∼ 𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

𝑁 𝑁 b.In the central-engine frame, the cooling time is determined by the condition 𝑁 2 𝑃 em 𝑡 c,CE = 𝑁𝛾 𝑗 𝑚𝑐 2. The observer frame time is shorter by a factor of 𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

, giving 

𝑡 c,obs = 𝑚𝑐 2  

> 𝛾 𝑗 𝑁 𝑃 em

= 𝑁 tot ,iso 𝛾 𝑗 𝑚𝑐 2 

> 𝐿 rad

≲ 2 𝜋𝑛𝑅 3 𝑚𝑐 2  

> 𝛾 𝑗 𝐿 rad

(7) 

= 5 × 10 −14 s 𝑛 10 𝑅 39 𝛾 −1 

> 𝑗, 3

𝐿 −1rad ,42 ,

= 1.1 × 10 −13 s 𝐵 0,15 Ω1𝜉 5𝛾 −1 

> 𝑗, 3

𝐿 −1rad ,42 

where we have taken the radial width of the emitting region to be the causally connected length 𝑅 /( 2𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

), so that 𝑁 tot ,iso <

2𝜋𝑛𝑅 3/𝛾 2 

> 𝑗

. While it might appear counterintuitive that 𝑡 c,obs 

increases with 𝜉 , this is merely a consequence of considering a given observed luminosity (recall that 𝑃 em ∝ 𝐿 rad /𝑁 2). The advantage of using 𝐿 rad is that it is directly observable, as opposed to the apriori unknown 𝑃 em .Since 𝑡 c,obs ≪ 𝑡 FRB ∼ 1 ms, emission sustained over the ob-served burst duration cannot be maintained without a contin-uous supply of fresh kinetic energy to particles. The problem is in fact more severe: with such a short cooling time, and no continuous acceleration, the characteristic frequency of the emergent radiation is limited by the uncertainty principle. The wavetrain duration 𝑡 c,obs ∼ 10 −13 s implies a minimum bandwidth Δ𝜈 ≳ 𝑡 −1c,obs ≈ 10 13 Hz, well above the radio band. The emission must therefore be broadband infrared rather than the narrow ∼GHz band actually observed. The very short cooling time in Eq. 7, implies that only a small number of particles can become mutually coherent through self-organization (via radiation reaction or through plasma instabilities such as two-stream or modulational in-stabilities). In the beam rest frame, without continuous re-acceleration of the particles, the distance over which elec-trons can be causally connected and produce phase-coherent radiation in the observer’s frame is ℓ′ ∼ 𝑐𝑡 ′ 

> 𝑐

= 𝑐𝑡 c,obs 𝛾 𝑗 ≪

𝛾 𝑗 𝜆 /( 2𝜋 ) where 𝜆 ≈ 30 cm is the wavelength of FRB radi-ation. In case particles are instead continuously accelerated and a balance is achieved between acceleration and radiation, then ℓ′ ∼ 𝛾 𝑗 𝜆 /( 2𝜋 )1. Multiplying the volume by 𝑛 ′ = 𝑛 /𝛾 ,we obtain the maximum number of electrons per bunch: 

𝑁 sc ,max = 𝑛 ′ 4 𝜋  

> 3

ℓ′3 ≲ (8) 

(3.7 × 10 9 𝐵 40,15 Ω41 𝑅 −39 𝜉 45 𝛾 −1 

> 𝑗, 3

𝐿 −3rad ,42 single shot acc. 

10 19 𝐵 0,15 Ω1 𝑅 −39 𝜉 5𝛾 2

> 𝑗, 3

𝜈 −39 continuous acc. For single shot acceleration, the result is a relatively small number – and as such it severely limits the gain in efficiency due to coherent emission. Note that the limit given by Eq. 8 only applies so long as the emission process relies on self-coordination of the emitting particles as a mechanism        

> 1The maximum possible size of ℓ′is the causally connected length 𝑅 /( 2𝛾 𝑗 )
> which may be much larger than 𝛾 𝑗 𝜆 . However, special additional require-ments must be put in place for this larger region to govern the maximum possible bunch size.

5for producing coherence. If there is an external bunching agent (driver imposed coherence)—such as density modu-lations from two-stream instabilities or other plasma insta-bilities, charge-starvation gaps, or magnetic reconnection structures—the transverse size of the bunch can be much larger. In this case, it may extend up to the Fresnel length, 

𝑅 ⊥ = (2𝑅𝜆 )1/2 (Kumar et al. 2017). However, the radial width remains limited by ℓ′. This relies on there being a background field that is coherent over a length scale at least as large as 𝑅 ⊥ and on the acceleration of electrons being gov-erned entirely by this background field. It is then possible for a strong pulse to sweep through this region and simulta-neously accelerate all the electrons, causing them to gyrate and radiate in phase at the observer position without requiring self-coordination 2. This leads to a larger maximum number of particles per bunch in the continuous case 3

𝑁 ex ,max =

(

𝑛 ′ 4 𝜋  

> 3

ℓ′3 single shot acc. 

𝑛 ′ 8 𝜋  

> 3

𝑅𝜆ℓ ′ continuous acc. (9) 

≲

(

3.7 × 10 9 𝐵 40,15 Ω41 𝑅 −39 𝜉 45 𝛾 −1 

> 𝑗, 3

𝐿 −3rad ,42 single shot acc. 

2.6 × 10 22 𝐵 0,15 Ω1 𝑅 −29 𝜉 5𝜈 −29 continuous acc. The bounds derived in this section are mechanism-independent in the following sense: regardless of whether coherence is achieved by an antenna mechanism, a plasma maser, or an inverse Compton scattering process, the radio output is limited by the kinetic energy density of the beam at the emission site. The brightness temperature, luminosity and cooling time bounds follow from this kinematic statement alone and do not depend on which microphysical channel con-verts kinetic energy into coherent radio waves. 

3. APPLICATION TO FRB MODELS Many FRB models invoking particle jets, do not include the required acceleration and therefore cannot account for the observed 𝑡 FRB , 𝑇 𝐵 and 𝐿 FRB (i.e. 𝐿 rad in Eq. 3). In this section we consider in detail the implications of these constraints on different proposed models. The expected inferred brightness temperature for different model classes and the allowed radii in which continuous acceleration can be supported are shown in Fig. 1. The magnetic field is taken as dipolar 𝐵 ∝ 𝑅 −3 up                                     

> 2In order for the per-electron energy loss to scale as 𝑁 𝑃 em , rather than 𝑃 em ,the bunch must radiate coherently rather than as individual particles. This requires the particles to establish dynamical coupling. In the comoving frame, the dynamical timescale is ∼𝑅 /( 𝛾 𝑗 𝑐 ) ∼ 3×10 −5𝑅 9𝛾 −1j,3s.For
> 𝑅 ≳7×10 7cm, this is longer than 𝑅 ⊥/𝑐 ≈8×10 −6𝑅 1/29𝜈 −1/29s, and causal contact across the bunch is established rapidly. The assumption that all particles in the bunch are dynamically coupled is justified in this case.
> 3For single shot acceleration, even with an external bunching mechanism, the lateral size is limited by min [𝑅 /𝛾, 𝑅 ⊥, 𝑐𝑡 ′
> 𝑐 ]. For typical FRB parameters,
> 𝑐𝑡 ′
> 𝑐 is much smaller than the other two length scales (see Eq. 7). We therefore use this scale to estimate 𝑁 ex ,max in the top line of Eq. 9.

Figure 1. Top: Observationally inferred brightness temperature as a function of the radius of the plasma beam for models involv-ing no in situ acceleration (Eq. 4). Magnetospheric (§3.1) and intermediate (§3.2) models without continuous acceleration, fall short by orders of magnitude as compared with the observed values (𝑇 𝐵 ∼ 10 33 − 10 37 K, shown by a shaded region). Bottom: The cen-tral engine frame electric field strength required in order to sustain the acceleration in the same models ( 𝐸 ∥ < 𝐵 (𝑅 )). Only models with sufficiently small radii (Eq. 11, depicted by shaded regions) can potentially support the necessary acceleration. Parameters as-sumed for these estimates are: 𝑃 = 1 s, 𝛾 𝑗 = 300 , 𝑡 FRB = 1 ms , 𝜈 =

10 9 Hz , 𝐿 FRB = 10 42 erg s −1, 𝜀 rad = 10 −3 and three different values of 𝜉 = 10 2, 10 4, 10 6.

to the light-cylinder, and as 𝑅 −1 above. The particle density is 𝜉𝑛 GJ (𝑅 ) within the magnetosphere and falls off as 𝑛 ∝ 𝑅 −2

above the light-cylinder (see e.g. Kirk et al. 2009). Our results outlined in the following subsections are sum-marized in Table 1. First, inner-magnetospheric models (§3.1) fail on energetics unless in-situ acceleration is invoked, 6at which point they survive only at sufficiently small radii and require a specific microphysical bunching driver. Second, forced-reconnection models (§3.2) pass the acceleration test automatically but face a tight energy budget / low efficiency crisis. Third, external shock maser models (§3.3) have ample energy at large radii, but the same parameters that make those radii energetically accessible also make the upstream wind optically thick to induced Compton scattering, preventing the emitted radio waves from escaping, without additional modi-fications that lead to further tension with observations (either in terms of spectral width or required efficiency). A hybrid model, synchrotron maser from monster shocks, magneto-spheric in origin but relying on maser emission from a shock, is addressed separately in the table and discussed in §3.1.1. 3.1. Magnetospheric models 

As outlined in §2, in-situ acceleration is necessary in or-der for magnetospheric models to achieve the high brightness temperature and luminosities observed in FRBs. This re-quires a sufficiently strong electric field, in which particles can be accelerated. Using Eq. 7, we can estimate the (cen-tral engine frame) electric field strength along the particles’ trajectories which is presumed to be along the background magnetic field: 

𝐸 ∥ ∼ 𝛾 𝑗 𝑚 𝑒 𝑐 2

𝑒𝑐𝑡 c,CE 

≳ 5.2 × 10 2 esu Ω−11 𝐵 −10,15 𝜉 −15 𝐿 FRB ,42 . (10) This is independent of radius. The background magnetic field, is 𝐵 (𝑅 ) ≳ 𝐸 ∥ . This is a conservative upper bound from energy conservation: since 𝐸 ∥ is most likely sourced by the magnetic field, 𝐸 2 

> ∥

< 𝐵 (𝑅 )2 requires the parallel field’s energy density not to exceed that of the magnetic field. At 𝐸 ∥ → 𝐵 (𝑅 ), force-free dynamics breaks down on timescales ∼ 𝜔 −1 

> 𝑝

≪ 𝑡 FRB and the field cannot be sus-tained. At smaller 𝐸 ∥ , sustained acceleration is in principle possible if the screening (via pair cascades) is balanced by the source (e.g., charge starvation, reconnection, twist). Con-sidering a dipolar field geometry, this places an upper limit on the emission radius of 𝐵 0 (𝑅 0/𝑅 )3 > 𝐸 ∥ leading to 

𝑅 < 1.2 × 10 10 𝐵 2/30,15 Ω1/31 𝜉 1/35 𝐿 −1/3FRB ,42 cm . (11) At such radii, the plasma in the magnetosphere can in prin-ciple account for the required electric field to accelerate the electrons. This is the case in the low-twist scenario of Wa-diasingh & Timokhin (2019), where the magnetar field is sufficiently undisturbed to permit charge-starved gap forma-tion that sustains strong field-aligned electric fields, accel-erating particles and triggering pair cascades and generation of coherent radio emission. Electric fields which sustain the acceleration and the coherent curvature emission are also re-quired in the model explored by Kumar & Bošnjak (2020), via charge starved Alfvén waves. Similarly, a large electric field is required in the model by Zhang (2022), whereby FRBs are created by IC scattering of kHz fast-magnetosonic waves (the existence of such kHz waves is well-motivated, see Blaes et al. 1989; Thompson & Duncan 1995; Timokhin et al. 2008; van Hoven & Levin 2011; Qu & Zhang 2024; Burnaz et al. 2025; Qu & Bransgrove 2026), although the origin of the electric field is not specified in this case. Other proposed magnetospheric models such as free-electron masers (Lyutikov 2021) do not include in-situ ac-celeration. Such models are subject to the energy supply constraints derived in §2, and are severely challenged to self-consistently reproduce FRB properties. A potential concern regarding the framework presented here is that first-principles simulations of pulsar polar-cap discharges (Timokhin 2010; Philippov et al. 2020) have demonstrated that pulsar radio emission may arise from non-stationary pair cascades and electromagnetic waves ex-cited during plasma-screening events, rather than from steady beams or coherent particle bunches as assumed in classical pulsar emission models. We note, however, that our frame-work remains applicable to such mechanisms. First, our anal-ysis explicitly shows that the pulsar coherent-emission mech-anism cannot be straightforwardly extrapolated to FRB lumi-nosities; the qualitative differences in brightness temperature and required particle number imply that even a fully-realistic theory of pulsar radio cannot automatically be adopted for FRBs. Second, and more fundamentally, in any such mecha-nism the radio output is ultimately powered by particle kinetic energy: the non-stationary electric field accelerates particles, which trigger pair cascades and excite plasma waves through screening dynamics. Energy continues to pass through the kinetic channel before being released as coherent radio, so the kinematic bounds derived above apply regardless of the specific coherence mechanism. An additional limitation on magnetospheric models is that the number of emitting particles per coherent bunch should not exceed 𝑁 ex ,max as given by Eq. 9 (or the more restric-tive 𝑁 sc ,max as given by Eq. 8 for models that rely on self-coordination between particles to achieve coherence). Recall-ing that 𝑃 em > 𝐿 rad /( 2𝜋𝑛𝑅 3 𝑁 max ) (Eq. 7), and combining with Eq. 9 we find that the minimum emission power per particle is required to be 

𝑃 em > 3𝐿 2rad    

> 8𝜋𝑛 2𝑅 4𝜆 2

≈ (12) 

2.7 × 10 −19 𝐿 FRB ,42 𝜉 −25 𝑅 29 𝐵 −20,15 Ω−21 𝜈 29 erg s −1.

The impact of the constraint given by Eq. 12 is model-dependent. For instance, in the IC scattering model, the emit-ted power per particle is orders of magnitude larger than given by Eq. 12 (Zhang 2022), and this particular consideration is not informative, as opposed to, say, the constraint given by Eq. 11. As we show next, the situation is different in the case of 7

Table 1. Summary of binding constraints on the three main FRB emission-model classes. Each class faces a different fundamental limitation; in no case does a single class survive without specific microphysical assumptions. Values are evaluated at fiducial FRB parameters: 𝐿 FRB ∼

10 42 erg s −1, 𝑡 FRB ∼ 1 ms, 𝜈 FRB ∼ 1 GHz.                                                                     

> Model class Binding constraint Resulting limit Required to survive
> Magnetospheric w/o in-situ acc. 𝑇 B;𝐿 rad ;𝑡 c,obs vs. 𝑇 Falls short of FRB 𝑇 Band 𝐿 FRB Continuous in-situ re-acceleration (Eqns. 4, 3, 7) by ≳7and ≳5orders of magnitude Magnetospheric with in-situ acc. 𝐸 ∥≲𝐵 (𝑅 );𝑁 max 𝑅 ≲10 10 cm (any mechanism) Transversely coherent driver (Eqns. 11, 8, 9) of size ≳√𝑅𝜆
> Magnetospheric monster shock 𝑁 req e,iso vs 𝑁 mag 𝐿 FRB demands huge density FMS pulse must clear magnetosphere ahead of precursor;
> →𝜈 peak ≫1GHz (tension with observed 𝐿 FRB , 𝜈 FRB )Light-cylinder reconnection 𝜖 iso , 𝜀 rec ,tot Falls short of FRB energies Contradicting and extreme requirements (Eq. 16, 18) and extremely inefficient to produce energetic FRBs with plausible efficiency External shock maser 𝜏 ICS ;𝜀 tot Severely Compton-thick High 𝜈 tail above peak (tension w. narrow-band FRBs); (Eqns. 29,A13) Low efficiency or 𝜎 w≳30 (suppresses efficiency further)

the antenna mechanism of coherent curvature radiation. For this mechanism, the emission frequency is 𝜈 ≈ 𝑐𝛾 3 

> 𝑗

/( 2𝜋𝑅 )

where 𝑅 is the magnetic field lines’ curvature radius, and we take it to be comparable to the emission radius. This leads to a required LF 𝛾 𝑗 ≈ 590 𝜈 1/39 𝑅 1/39 . The emitted power per particle for bunches moving in a curved trajectory is 

𝑃 cur = 2𝑒 2𝛾 4 

> 𝑗

𝑐 

3𝑅 2 ≈ 5.7 × 10 −16 𝜈 4/39 𝑅 −2/39 erg s −1. (13) Combining with Eq. 12, we find that coherent curvature radiation is consistent with the maximum number of particles per bunch as long as 4

𝑅 < 1.7 × 10 10 𝜉 3/45 𝐵 3/40,15 Ω3/41 𝐿 −3/8FRB ,42 𝜈 −1/49 cm . (14) For curvature radiation, this constraint is comparable to Eq. 11, depending somewhat on the values of the model parame-ters and observables considered. 3.1.1. Magnetospheric shock-maser mechanisms: monster shocks 

A recently developed scenario that merits separate com-ment is the ‘monster shock’ model (Chen et al. 2022; Be-loborodov 2023; Vanthieghem & Levinson 2025), in which a fast-magnetosonic wave launched by a magnetospheric dis-turbance steepens into a strong radiative shock within the magnetosphere with coherent GHz emission produced as a precursor wave. This model occupies an interesting hybrid situation in the framework described in this work. The shock-maser mechanism has been validated by multiple independent         

> 4A closely related constraint on coherent curvature radiation was derived by Cooper & Wijers (2021) who imposed the requirement that the bunch’s self-induced perpendicular field not destabilize the coherence, yielding a maximum luminosity 𝐿 max coh ∝𝑅 −6. Their bound on the maximum coherent radius is consistent in spirit with our Eq. 14. The constraints differ in which physical effect sets the bunch-size limit (the self-induced 𝐵 ⊥for Cooper & Wijers (2021); the energy budget and brightness temperature for us), but they yield bounds of similar magnitude and lead to the same qualitative conclusion: coherent curvature radiation at FRB luminosities requires emission radii relatively close to the stellar surface.

simulations beyond the force-free approximation, including local 1D PIC (Chen et al. 2022; Vanthieghem & Levinson 2025), global 2D PIC in a dipolar magnetosphere (Bernardi et al. 2025), and global 3D relativistic MHD (Grehan et al. 2026). These simulations confirm shock formation through nonlinear wave steepening and, at the kinetic level, the pro-duction of a coherent precursor wave through the synchrotron maser instability. The basic shock-formation physics is there-fore on firm ground. Three questions, however, remain open from the perspective of FRB application: (i) whether the precursor wave can escape the surrounding magnetospheric pair plasma to reach the observer; (ii) whether the model can reproduce FRB-level luminosities; and (iii) the angular distribution of emission for non-equatorial shock geometries. The first and third questions are explicitly flagged as open in the simulation literature. Below we address the second, and in the process find that the same density requirements that would source FRB-level luminosities also exacerbate the escape problem. The shock provides continuous acceleration in situ, and the constraints of §2 are nominally satisfied. However, the acceleration in the monster shock model relies on a contin-uous fresh supply of upstream material crossing the shock front. To sustain the FRB luminosity over 𝑡 FRB , the required number of particles must be at least that given by Eq. 5. As shown by Eq. 6, this exceeds the Goldreich–Julian den-sity by at least a factor of 10 12 . This raises two concerns. First, the escape problem. The required pair plasma can in principle be produced by the fast-magnetosonic wave itself through pair cascades, but this raises the local density by a vast factor in the very region the radio wave must traverse to escape, exacerbating the efficiency / induced-Compton opac-ity problem (as well as stimulated Raman scattering) ana-lyzed in the context of the external shock case in §3.3.1. The escape problem for monster-shock FRBs therefore remains unresolved in this model, as the parameters required to make the emission viable are subject to conflicting demands: a8higher particle density is needed to power the observed lu-minosity, whereas a lower particle density is required for the radiation to escape. Second, the frequency problem: even if the required particle number can be supplied, the result is that the emission will peak at 𝜈 ≫ 1 GHz. This is be-cause, using Eq. 5, and taking the emission radius to be where the wave electric field is |𝐸 | = 𝐵 (𝑅 )/ 2, the emission radius is 𝑅 ∼ 6 × 10 7 𝐵 1/20,15 𝐿 −1/4fms ,45 cm (where 𝐿 fms ∼ 𝜀 −1rad 𝐿 FRB 

is the luminosity of the fast magnetosonic wave). The re-quired density is 𝑛 req ∼ 10 19 𝐿 7/4FRB ,42 𝑡 FRB ,−3𝛾 −1

> 𝑗, 5

𝜀 −7/4rad ,−3cm −3,where we have conservatively normalized the total radiative efficiency by 10 −3, but we note that the true efficiency may be smaller, especially for a magnetized upstream (see §A). Therefore, in the far upstream, the lab-frame plasma fre-quency is 𝜔 p ∼ 1.7 × 10 14 𝐿 7/8FRB ,42 𝑡 1/2FRB ,−3𝛾 −1/2 

> 𝑗, 5

𝜀 −7/8rad ,−3 Hz. Vanthieghem & Levinson (2025) argue that in the imme-diate upstream of the monster shock, the plasma has been pre-accelerated by the wave to a large LF relative to the shock, 𝛾 𝑢 ∼ 10 5. The observed maser emission then peaks at 𝜔 peak ≈√︁ 𝜎 𝑢 /𝛾 𝑢 𝜔 p ∼ 5 × 10 12 Hz, where we have taken 

𝜎 𝑢 ∼ 94 𝐵 1/20,15 𝐿 −1/4fms ,45 as in Vanthieghem & Levinson (2025). This frequency is 5000 times larger than the GHz band in which FRBs are typically observed. These considerations suggest that, barring other difficulties, the monster shock mechanism may only be capable of producing very low-energy FRBs, but is unlikely to account for a typical FRB. After completion of this analysis, Beloborodov (2026) posted a detailed self-consistent treatment of the monster shock and its precursor. Based on arguments distinct from those given here, that work reaches a strikingly similar conclusion: mon-ster shocks inside the magnetosphere can produce FRBs only at the low-energy end of the population, comparable to the SGR 1935+2154 event. Moreover, increasing the energy of the launching fast-magnetosonic wave strongly reduces the maser efficiency, ruling out the model for typical cosmologi-cal FRBs regardless of the input energy. 3.2. Intermediate, light-cylinder, model - Forced reconnection 

In forced reconnection models (Philippov et al. 2019; Lyubarsky 2020), the energy is carried away from the NS in the form of Poynting flux, which is subsequently converted via reconnection into kinetic energy of the particles before a fraction is released as radio waves. A crucial distinction from beam-driven models is that the reconnection layer itself serves as a continuous particle acceleration site, so the kinetic energy need not be transported to a separate emission region. The constraints derived in §2 therefore do not apply directly to this class of models. Crab nanoshots are the only known transients with com-parable brightness temperatures to FRBs, 𝑇 B,ns = 10 37 − 2 ×

10 41 K (Hankins et al. 2003; Hankins & Eilek 2007; Jessner et al. 2010), making them a particularly instructive compari-son. A version of the forced reconnection model, operating outside the light cylinder, has been proposed to power these nanoshots (Philippov et al. 2019). We note that this inter-pretation of the giant-pulse emission has been questioned by alternative proposals (Wu 2024) and by the substantial X-ray energetics associated with giant pulses (Enoto et al. 2021), which may point toward an inner-magnetospheric origin in-stead. Our analysis below is agnostic to the correct picture for Crab nanoshots; we consider only the consequences of extrap-olating the mechanism to FRB luminosities, which we show face serious difficulties independent of the nanoshot ques-tion. Taking the relevant Crab observables - 𝐵 0 ≈ 10 12 G, 

Ω ≈ 190 Hz, 𝜈 9 ≈ 3 − 10 , 𝑡 ≈ 0.4 − 4 × 10 −9 s, as well as 𝑅 ≈ 𝑅 LC = 𝑐 /Ω ∼ 1.6 × 10 8 cm, 𝛾 𝑗 ≈ 10 4, 𝜉 ≈ 10 2

as required by the reconnection model - we can evaluate the beam-driven bounds derived above and ask whether they are satisfied. The answer is negative. Applying these parame-ters to Eq. 4 gives 𝑇 B ≈ 𝜀 rad 10 35 −38 .5K, inconsistent with the observed values at the upper end of the nanoshot brightness temperature range. The luminosity bound from Eq. 3 yields 

𝐿 rad ≈ 𝜀 rad 8 × 10 33 erg s −1 falling well below the observed peak luminosities of 𝐿 rad ,ns ≈ 10 38 −39 erg s −1. The cool-ing time estimate is the most vivid illustration: Eq. 7 gives 

𝑡 c,ns ≲ 2 × 10 −15 s, up to six orders of magnitude shorter than the nanoshot duration. These three estimates establish that one-shot beam-driven emission is untenable even for the Crab nanoshots. The re-connection model of Philippov et al. (2019) evades all three bounds for the same reason: the reconnection layer contin-uously replenishes the particle energy at the emission site. However, note that the acceleration must operate on a very short timescale. It should refresh the particles’ energy on an observed timescale of 𝑡 c,ns ∼ 2 × 10 −15 s, orders of magnitude shorter than the dynamical timescale. The Crab nanoshots thus serve as direct demonstration of the conclusion that continuous in-situ acceleration (provided by reconnection or otherwise) is a necessary ingredient for producing the most extreme coherent radio transients. Moving from the crab nanoshots to FRBs, we can once more place a lower limit on the required electric field to continuously accelerate the particles. Two additional con-siderations modify the limit provided by Eq. 11. First, in reconnection models the electric field is 𝐸 rec ∼ 𝛽 in 𝐵 rec with 

𝛽 in ∼ 0.1 being the normalized velocity of particles flowing into the reconnection layer. Second, the wind magnetic field at the light-cylinder, 𝐵 w (𝑅 LC ), is compressed by the fast mag-netosonic (FMS) pulse by a factor of ∼ 𝐵 fms /𝐵 w (𝑅 LC ), such that the reconnecting field is 𝐵 rec ∼ 𝐵 fms where 

𝐵 fms =√︄ 𝐿 fms ,47 

𝑐𝑅 2LC 

≈ 6 × 10 8 𝐿 1/2fms ,47 Ω1 G (15) 9is the magnetic field associated with the FMS pulse. The width of the compressed wind at the light cylinder is ∼

𝑅 LC 𝐵 w (𝑅 LC )/ 𝐵 fms . If, at the point of reconnection, the wind is moving outwards at a LF Γw, then the pulse can only over-take a region narrower than this by a factor 2Γ2w before the wind expands significantly (Beniamini & Kumar 2023), so that the effective width is 𝑊 rec ∼ 𝑅 LC 𝐵 w (𝑅 LC )/( 2Γ2w 𝐵 fms ).The radiated energy in this model, is a fraction 𝜀 rad of the magnetic energy in the reconnecting layer 5:

𝜖 iso ∼ 𝜀 rad 4𝜋𝑅 2LC 𝑊 rec   

> 𝐵 2fms
> 4𝜋

∼ 𝜀 rad 𝐵 0 𝑅 30 𝐵 fms /( 2Γ2w)∼ 3 × 10 39 𝜀 rad ,−2 𝐵 0,15 𝐿 1/2fms ,47 Ω1Γ−2w erg. 

∼ 2 × 10 39 𝜀 rad ,−2 𝐿 1/2fms ,47 Γ−2w

 30 days 

> 𝑡 sd

1/2

erg. (16) where 𝑡 sd is the spindown time. This equation shows that it is not trivial for this model to account for the isotropic equivalent energies of FRBs, which can reach ∼ 10 42 erg (e.g. Shah et al. 2026), even for an extremely short spindown time (which is clearly incompatible with repeaters detected observed for over a decade) and if the wind is only mildly relativistic at the light-cylinder Γw ≈ 1.The observed burst duration in this model reflects that of the magnetic pulse launched from the NS surface. Therefore, we have 𝐿 FRB ∼ 𝜖 iso /𝑡 FRB . Plugging this into Eq. 10 and comparing with 𝐸 rec , the electric field condition becomes: 

2.6 × 10 −5 < 𝜀 −1rad ,−2𝑡 FRB ,−3Ω1Γ2w 𝛽 rec ,−1𝜉 5 (17) which can be easily satisfied for typical model parameters. While 𝜀 rad gives the radiative efficiency, Eq. 16 shows that the total efficiency associated with this model is much lower due to the relatively small amount of usable magnetic energy as compared with the energy of the FMS pulse, 

𝜀 rec ,tot = 𝜖 iso   

> 𝑁 fms 𝐿 fms 𝑡 FRB

(18) 

≈ 3 × 10 −6𝜀 rad ,−2 𝐵 0,15 𝐿 −1/2fms ,47 Ω1Γ−2w 𝑡 −1FRB ,−3 𝑁 −1fms ,1

≈ 2 × 10 −6𝜀 rad ,−2 𝐿 −1/2fms ,47 Γ−2w 𝑡 −1FRB ,−3

 30 days 

> 𝑡 sd

1/2

𝑁 −1fms ,1

≈ 4 × 10 −6𝜀 2rad ,−2Γ−4w 𝑡 −1FRB ,−3

 30 days 

> 𝑡 sd

  10 39 erg 

> 𝜖 iso



𝑁 −1fms ,1

where 𝑁 fms is the number of pulses released by the NS in a given emission episode. This factor accounts for the fact that only the first pulse can lead to forced reconnection, as it sig-nificantly disturbs the magnetosphere, and the latter ejected               

> 5For Γ𝑤 →1(a mildly relativistic wind at the reconnection site near the light cylinder, as adopted in Lyubarsky 2020), Eq. 16 recovers his estimate
> 𝜖 ∼𝐵 pulse 𝐵 w𝑅 3LC . For larger Γ𝑤 (𝑅 LC ), the available reconnection energy is further suppressed by 2Γ2
> 𝑤 , making the energy budget even tighter.

pulses, do not interact with a an unperturbed striped wind (Be-niamini & Kumar 2023). Eq. 18 represents a tiny efficiency, even for an extremely young magnetar and when allowing for an only mildly relativistic wind at the light-cylinder, Γw → 1.Increasing 𝐿 fms raises 𝜖 iso but decreases 𝜀 rec ,tot , at the same rate, so no choice of 𝐿 fms , simultaneously raises the available energy and the conversion efficiency. 

Figure 2. Total efficiency in the forced reconnection model ( 𝜀 tot )as a function of the isotropic equivalent FRB energy, 𝜖 iso and the assumed spindown age of the NS source, 𝑡 sd . For FRB 20121102A, the true age is > 14 yr (vertical line) and this leads to tiny efficiencies in this model, especially for higher energy bursts. Results are plotted for a radiative efficiency (fraction of energy in reconnection zone, radiated in radio) of 𝜀 rad = 10 −2 as well as for Γw = 1, 𝑁 fms =

10 , 𝑡 FRB = 1 ms, see §3.2 for details. 

To summarize, forced reconnection models naturally pro-vide in-situ acceleration, and the corresponding electric-field condition is straightforwardly satisfied. The principal chal-lenge for the FRB application is energetic: producing the observed isotropic-equivalent energies with reasonable effi-ciencies requires combinations of high 𝜀 rad , low Γw, and very short 𝑡 sd , beyond their plausibility limits. The efficiency of this model as a function of 𝜖 iso and 𝑡 sd is presented in Fig. 2. In particular, this is very difficult to reconcile with active re-peaters. For FRB 20121102A’s age of > 14 yr, 𝑡 sd would need to be much shorter than 14 yr to power flares at the present epoch. This contradicts the system remaining remaining con-tinuously active at comparable levels since detection. Other, independent, difficulties of the forced reconnection model of FRBs include the expected spectrum, which is wide as op-posed to what is observed in many bursts (Zhou et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Sand et al. 2025). 3.3. Far away model - synchrotron maser 10 Synchrotron maser emission from relativistic shocks lo-cated at AU-scale distances from the central engine has been widely proposed as a mechanism for powering FRBs (Lyubarsky 2014; Beloborodov 2017, 2019; Metzger et al. 2019; Margalit et al. 2020b). In this picture, a highly ener-getic baryonic outflow launched by the neutron star drives a relativistic shock into the surrounding medium, where coher-ent radio emission is produced. As discussed in §1, several recent observations have been interpreted as favoring emission sites much closer to the cen-tral engine. However, these arguments are not yet conclusive, and far-away blast-wave models remain among the leading FRB scenarios. Moreover, the constraints developed in this work are independent of the emission location and can there-fore be applied directly to such models. In this section we examine the implications of the kinetic-energy bottleneck for relativistic-shock FRB scenarios. The injected luminosities invoked in these models are typi-cally very large, ∼ 10 46 −10 49 , erg , s−1 (Margalit et al. 2020b). Combined with the large emission radii, 𝑅 ∼ 10 12 − 10 13 , cm ,these parameters allow the beaming constraints derived in §2 to be satisfied without requiring continuous particle accelera-tion. However, the same large energy fluxes and upstream densities that enable this also imply substantial induced-Compton opacity for coherent GHz radiation propagating ahead of the shock, as discussed next. 3.3.1. induced Compton optical depth 

If the FRB radio pulse is generated at 𝑅 via the shock-maser process, then the observed duration of the burst is: 

𝑡 FRB ≈ 𝑅 

2𝑐 Γ2sf 

. (19) where Γsf is the LF of the shock front. Following the setup proposed in Metzger et al. (2019) we focus on dissipation in the forward shocked region. We consider five different LFs involved in the shock interaction. In addition to Γsf , these are: 

Γ𝑤 (the LF of the upstream wind), Γsp (the LF of the shocked plasma), 𝛾 𝑢 (the LF of the unshocked wind relative to the shock front), and 𝛾 𝑑 (the LF of the shocked plasma relative to the shock front). As shown below (Eq. 20), only two of these five LFs are apriori unknown. They depend on the LF and luminosity of the relativistic outflow driving the shock. For a highly relativistic shock, the LF of the shocked plasma associated with its bulk motion relative to the shock front (𝛾 𝑑 ) corresponds to that of the appropriate wave that trans-ports signals downstream to within a factor of order unity. For an upstream wind magnetization 𝜎 w ≫ 1, the relevant MHD wave propagates with the Alfvén speed and has a LF of √1 + 𝜎 w. In contrast, for 𝜎 w ≪ 1, the signal propagates with the sound speed, which, for a highly relativistic shock, is ∼ 𝑐 /√3. An equation for ( 𝛾 𝑑 ) valid in both the ( 𝜎 w ≫ 1)and ( 𝜎 w ≪ 1) limits is 6, 𝛾 𝑑 ≈ ( 𝜎 w + 9/8)1/2. For ease of readability, we use below the slightly cruder approximation 

𝛾 𝑑 ≈ ( 𝜎 w + 1)1/2 which simplifies the algebra. 𝛾 𝑑 and 𝛾 𝑢 are related to the other LFs via Lorentz transformations 

𝛾 𝑑 ≈ Γsf 

2Γsp 

≈ ( 𝜎 w + 1)1/2, 𝛾 𝑢 ≈ Γsf 

2Γ𝑤 

. (20) The kinetic energy flux carried by electrons, as seen in the shock front comoving frame 7, and the total energy flux that includes the contributions from the magnetic field are: 

𝐹 e,sf = 𝑚 𝑒 𝑐 3𝑛 w𝛾 2 

> 𝑢

and 𝐹 tot ,sf = 𝑚 w𝑐 3𝑛 w (1 + 𝜎 w)𝛾 2

> 𝑢

.

(21) where 𝑚 𝑒 is electron mass, 𝑚 w is the particle mass that dom-inates the CSM density and 𝑛 w is the particle density in the upstream wind frame. Here and in what follows 𝑄 𝑥,𝑦 denotes the (central engine) quantity 𝑄 𝑥 as measured in frame 𝑦 (e.g. shock front frame in Eq. 21). According to numerical simulations, a fraction 𝜀 ma of the electron kinetic energy flux in the shocked plasma frame is converted to radio photons via the synchrotron maser process 8. Thus, the maser photon energy flux in the rest frame of the shocked plasma is 𝐹 ma ,sp ≈ 𝜀 ma 𝐹 e,sp , with 

𝐹 e,sp = (Γsp /Γsf )2 𝐹 e,sf = 𝐹 e,sf /[ 4(1 + 𝜎 w)] . The energy flux in EM radiation in the central engine frame just outside the shock front is: 

𝐹 ma ≈ 𝐹 ma ,sp (4Γ2sp ) ≈ 𝜀 ma 𝑚 𝑒 𝑛 w𝑐 3 Γ4sf 

16 (1 + 𝜎 w)2Γ2

> 𝑤

, (22) The factor 4Γ2sp in this equation is of similar origin to the factor 𝛾 2 

> 𝑢

described in footnote (7), except that this time we are dealing with radiation moving approximately radially out-wards in the shocked plasma frame (for 𝜎 w ≫ 1) and hence the appropriate transformation is a Doppler as opposed to a Lorentz transformation. The particle density in the CSM is related to the central engine frame isotropic equivalent lumi-nosity of the electrons 𝐿 𝑒 ,

𝐿 𝑒 = 4𝜋𝑅 2𝑛 w𝑚 𝑒 𝑐 3Γ2 

> 𝑤

→ 𝑛 w = 𝐿 𝑒 

4𝜋𝑅 2𝑚 𝑒 𝑐 3Γ2

> 𝑤

. (23)                                                            

> 6𝛾 𝑑 ≈ ( 𝜎 w+9/8)1/2for 𝜎 w≫1and 𝛾 𝑑 ≈√︁ 9(1+𝜎 w)/ 8for 𝜎 w≪1
> (e.g. Narayan et al. 2011). In the limit 𝜎 w→0,𝛾 𝑑 =√︁ 9/8or 𝛽 𝑑 =1/3.For a detailed description of MHD shocks, see Kennel & Coroniti (1984).
> 7
> One factor of 𝛾 𝑢 in the expression for 𝐹 e,sf represents the relative LF of the upstream plasma with respect to the shock front. This corresponds to Lorentz contraction of length, meaning the density in the shock front frame is larger than in the CSM rest frame by this factor. Furthermore, the energy of each particle in the shock front comoving frame is ∼𝛾 𝑢 𝑚 w𝑐 2, which accounts for the other factor in the expression for 𝐹 e,sf .
> 8𝜀 ma is equivalent to the parameter 𝑔 𝜉 defined in Plotnikov & Sironi (2019), defined relative to the electron kinetic energy flux in the shocked plasma frame. This differs from their 𝑓 𝜉 defined relative to the total incoming energy flux, by a factor of (1+𝜎 w); in particular, 𝑔 𝜉 remains approximately constant at high 𝜎 w, whereas 𝑓 𝜉 ∝𝜎 −1w.

11 Substituting this back into equation (22), we obtain the bolo-metric isotropic equivalent luminosity of maser emission from a shock 

𝐿 FRB = 4𝜋𝑅 2 𝐹 ma ≈ 𝜀 ma 𝐿 𝑒 

 Γsp 

Γ𝑤 

4

. (24) The frequency of maser emission in the observer frame is: 

𝜔 FRB ≃ 3Γsp 𝜔 𝑝 (1 + 𝜎 w)1/2 ≈ 3 𝑒 Γsp 𝐿 1/2 

> 𝑒

(1 + 𝜎 w)1/2

𝑅 Γ𝑤 𝑐 3/2𝑚 𝑒 

.

(25) where 𝜔 𝑝 = (4𝜋𝑒 2𝑛 w/𝑚 𝑒 )1/2 is the plasma frequency in the rest of the CSM and we have used equation 23. We can eliminate 𝐿 𝑒 from this expression in terms of the observed quantities 𝐿 FRB & 𝑡 FRB using (24) & (19), and eliminate Γsp 

using (20) to obtain: 

𝜈 FRB ≡ 𝜔 FRB 

2𝜋 ≃ 3 √2𝑒 Γ𝑤 (𝐿 FRB 𝑡 FRB ) 12 (1 + 𝜎 w)

𝜋𝑐 𝑚 𝑒 𝜀 1/2ma 𝑅 3/2 . (26) The cross section for induced Compton scattering (ICS) in the rest frame of the medium through which the FRB pulse travels can be written as, e.g. Kumar & Lu (2020) 

𝜎 ICS ,w ≈ 3𝜎 𝑇 𝜃 2s,w 𝐿 FRB ,w

64 𝜋 2𝑚 𝑒 𝜈 3FRB ,w 𝑅 2 , (27) The wind frame and observer frame variables are related as follows: 𝐿 FRB ,w ≈ 𝐿 FRB /4Γ2 

> 𝑤

, 𝜈 FRB ,w ≈ 𝜈 FRB /2Γ𝑤 , 𝜃 s,w ≈

min {𝜋 /2, 2Γ𝑤 𝜃 s } and 𝜃 s is the opening angle of the beam. Since 4𝜋𝑅 2 represents the surface area perpendicular to the wind direction, it is the same in primed and unprimed frames. The optical depth to ICS 𝜏 ICS = 𝜎 ICS ,w𝑛 w 𝑑 w; where 𝑑 w ≈

min 𝑅 /Γ𝑤 , 2𝑐𝑡 FRB ,w/𝜃 2s,w is the distance that a scattered photon, typically moving at an angle 𝜃 s,w with respect to the FRB pulse propagation direction, remains within the pulse or travels a distance where the electron density drops by a factor of ∼ 2, whichever is smaller, and 𝑡 FRB ,w = 2Γ𝑤 𝑡 FRB .Combining these factors, we find the ICS optical depth to be 

𝜏 ICS ≈

3𝜎 𝑇 𝑛 w 𝐿 FRB 𝑐𝑡 FRB Γ2 

> 𝑤

min 



1, 𝑅 𝜃 2s,w 

> 2Γ2
> 𝑤 𝑐𝑡 FRB



8𝜋 2𝑚 𝑒 𝜈 3FRB 𝑅 2 (28) For maser emission from shocks in the CSM, 𝜃 s,w ≈

Γ𝑤 /Γsp . Combining this with Eqns. 19 and 20 we find 

𝑅𝜃 2s,w/( 2Γ2 

> 𝑤

𝑐𝑡 FRB ) ∼ Γ2sf /( 2Γsp )2 ∼ 2(1 + 𝜎 w), and the term “min {... }" is equal to unity in the above equation. Substituting for 𝑛 w using (23), and for 𝜈 FRB using Eq. 26, we can eliminate 𝑅 and 𝐿 𝑤 in terms of the observables 𝐿 FRB ,

𝜈 FRB , and 𝑡 FRB . This results in a very simple expression for the IC optical depth in the external shock model for FRBs, 

𝜏 ICS ≈ 490 𝑡 FRB ,−3 𝜈 FRB ,9 𝜀 ma ,−3 (1 + 𝜎 w)−2. (29) where we have normalized 𝜀 ma by ∼ 10 −3 (e.g. Plotnikov & Sironi (2019) find 𝜀 ma ≈ 2 × 10 −3). The induced Compton optical depth is therefore independent of the FRB luminosity, the FRB jet LF, the unshocked CSM LF, its density and the emission radius. The equation is valid at all radii, both below and above the deceleration radius of the FRB relativistic jet. The induced Compton constraint therefore cannot be evaded by tuning these quantities, and only by raising 𝜎 w or accepting a high-frequency tail (see below) can the model remain viable. Specifically, since 𝜏 ICS ∝ 𝜀 ma (1 + 𝜎 w)−2, reaching 𝜏 ICS ≲ 1

thus requires 𝜎 w ≈ 30 . However, this significantly reduces the total efficiency as discussed next. The efficiency 𝜀 ma was found from electron-positron PIC simulations. Assuming that the efficiency relative to the shocked electron flux is fixed when the composition is changed 9, the total efficiency of the maser model is sup-pressed by an additional factor of 𝑚 𝑒 /[ 8𝑚 w (1 + 𝜎 w)2] rela-tive to 𝜀 ma , i.e. 𝜀 tot ≈ 2.5 × 10 −4 (𝑚 𝑒 /𝑚 w)( 1 + 𝜎 w)−2 (see appendix §A for details) and, in turn, 

𝜏 ICS ≈ 49 𝑡 FRB ,−3𝜈 FRB ,9𝜀 tot ,−4, (30) i.e. removing the dependence on 𝜎 w in this form. For typical FRB observables, the induced Compton optical depth is significantly larger than unity (independent of ion loading of the magnetar wind). This imposes important con-straints on the synchrotron maser model in the external shock scenario. Two escape routes from this constraint appear pos-sible, as demonstrated in Fig. 3: (i) emission at radii ≫ 𝑅 

(where 𝑅 is given in equation (26)) via a high-frequency maser tail (Metzger et al. 2019; Margalit et al. 2020b), and (ii) operation at 𝜎 w ≳ 30 . Both face difficulties. (i) requires the maser to have a broadband high-frequency tail, which is poorly constrained by current PIC simulations and incon-sistent with both warm-plasma simulations showing narrow 

Δ𝜈 /𝜈 ∼ 0.2 features at a frequency near that given by Eq. 26 (Babul & Sironi 2020) and observations of intrinsically narrow FRB spectra. It also reduces the efficiency further relative to 𝜀 tot discussed above. (ii) further reduces the maser efficiency as (1 + 𝜎 w)−2 and shifts the typical frequency in a way that suppresses the X-ray incoherent synchrotron coun-terpart predicted by the model (Margalit et al. 2020a). 

4. CONCLUSIONS       

> 9If thermal equilibrium can be reached between electrons and protons in an electron–proton plasma, the fraction of the energy flux crossing the shock front that is converted into radio waves might not be suppressed by the factor 𝑚 𝑝 /𝑚 𝑒 that one might otherwise expect. This possibility is suggested by the simulation results of Iwamoto et al. (2024). However, if the electron–ion coupling upstream of the shock is effective, it would heat the electrons to relativistic temperatures. This, in turn, would suppress maser emission by electrons. The simulations of Iwamoto et al. (2024) were not run long enough to provide a firm answer regarding the maser efficiency in an electron–ion plasma.

12                           

> Figure 3. Total radiative efficiency (blue) and optical depth to induced Compton at the peak emission frequency (purple) in the maser blastwave model. The results are shown for 𝑡 FRB =1ms,
> 𝜈 =1GHz and are independent of other FRB observables. Mod-els involving small to moderate magnetization, 𝜎 w≲30 , rely on intrinsically broadband spectrum of the maser emission in order to produce any observable signal. However these lead to a significant reduction of the already low efficiency, and generally results in ob-served broadband spectra. 𝜎 w≳30 can naturally result in optically thin conditions at the maser peak, but the maximum efficiency is tiny 𝜖 tot ≲10 −10 for electron ion ( 𝜖 tot ≲2×10 −7for pairs).

Practically all proposed FRB models involve the luminosity being carried at some point by a kinetic flow. We have shown here that this leads to general constraints on the mechanism powering FRBs. In particular, models in which the emission arises from near or below the light-cylinder (intermediate and magnetospheric models - including coherent-antenna mech-anisms, plasma masers, and inverse-Compton-scattering sce-narios), must involve continuous in-situ acceleration. With-out this, their luminosity and brightness temperature fall short by orders of magnitude as compared with observed FRBs. An equivalent statement is that given the typical FRB luminosi-ties, particles in these environments cool down on a timescale much shorter than the FRB duration, and indeed, shorter even than the FRB wave period. Continuous acceleration can be naturally provided by an electric field, but the strength of the latter is constrained by the background magnetic field. This consideration leads to a further constraint on the emission radius, which is of the order of 10 10 cm for typical observed parameters (Eq. 11). In specific models, additional constraints can be placed based, e.g., on the emissivity per particle. A different example is that of forced reconnection near the light-cylinder. This model, while able to supply continuous acceleration, is strongly chal-lenged to explain the observed energetics and required effi-ciencies of FRB sources (Eq. 18). Monster shocks in the magnetosphere can also provide a source of acceleration, but since fresh particles must be continuously supplied, the re-quirement on the particle number exceeds the supply of the magnetosphere by orders of magnitude (Eqns. 5,6). This exacerbates the escape problem in such models. Moreover, even if the necessary particle numbers can be supplied, those same conditions will lead to the observed maser emission frequency being many times greater than observed in FRBs. Far-away models, such as synchrotron maser in a relativistic blastwave, can naturally overcome the luminosity and bright-ness temperature constraints mentioned above. However, the same properties of the outflow (large luminosity and density) that help it overcome these constraints, lead to an indepen-dent challenge of the synchrotron maser model in the form of the induced Compton optical depth. As we have shown here, the latter depends only on the FRB duration and frequency and on the intrinsic maser efficiency and is always ≫ 1 (Eq. 30). The implication is that external shock maser models must rely on a significant high frequency spectral tail above the maser peak in order for any emission to come out in this scenario whatsoever. However, this then leads to a further re-duced efficiency (Eq. A13) and, more importantly, makes the common occurrence of narrow observed FRB spectra highly fine-tuned in this model. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Yuri Lyubarsky, Bing Zhang, Zorawar Wadi-asingh, Alex Cooper, Kaustubh Rajwade and Jason Hessels for helpful discussions. We acknowledge support provided by the NASA grant 80NSSC24K0770 for this work. PB’s work was also funded by a grant (no. 2024788) from the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), Jerusalem, Israel and by a grant (no. 1649/23) from the Israel Science Foundation. APPENDIX  

> A.

STRONG RELATIVISTIC MAGNETIZED SHOCKS Consider a collision between a magnetized (with magnetization 𝜎 4 ≫ 1) relativistic (with LF Γ4 ≫ 1) ejecta (with comoving density 𝑛 4) with a magnetized relativistic wind (characterized by 𝜎 1, 𝑛 1, Γ1 accordingly). The collision results in two shocks, a reverse shock (RS) propagating back into the ejecta and a forward shock (FS) propagating into the wind. The entire medium can be divided into four regions: unshocked wind (region 1), shocked wind (region 2), shocked ejecta (region 3) and unshocked 13 ejecta (region 4). Regions 2 and 3 are separated by a contact discontinuity. We consider the case in which both the FS and RS are strong shocks, which holds as long as Γ2RS ,4 ≫ 𝜎 4, Γ2FS ,1 ≫ 𝜎 1 (where Γ𝑋,𝑌 denotes the LF of region 𝑋 relative to region 𝑌 ). In the strong shock limit, one finds ΓRS ,3 ≈ 𝜎 1/24 , ΓFS ,2 ≈ 𝜎 1/21 . Using the results of Narayan et al. (2011) 

𝑛 3 = ΓRS ,4 𝑛 4 

> ΓRS ,3

; 𝑃 gas 3 = 𝑛 4 𝑚 4 𝑐 2 Γ2RS ,4 

> 8𝜎 4

; 𝑃 mag 3 = 4𝜎 4 𝑃 gas 3 (A1) 

𝑛 2 = ΓFS ,1 𝑛 1 

> ΓFS ,2

; 𝑃 gas 2 = 𝑛 1 𝑚 1 𝑐 2 Γ2FS ,1 

> 8𝜎 1

; 𝑃 mag 2 = 4𝜎 1 𝑃 gas 2

where 𝑚 4 (𝑚 1) is the mass of the particles dominating the rest mass of the ejecta (wind). The total pressure in the shocked regions is: 

𝑃 tot 3 = 𝑃 gas 3 + 𝑃 mag 3 ≈ 𝑃 mag 3 ; 𝑃 tot 3 = 𝑃 gas 2 + 𝑃 mag 2 ≈ 𝑃 mag 2 (A2) Equality of pressure and velocity across the contact discontinuity means that 

𝑃 tot 3 = 𝑃 tot 2 → 𝑛 4𝑚 4Γ2RS ,4 = 𝑛 1𝑚 1Γ2FS ,1 ; Γ3 = Γ 2. (A3) Applying a velocity transformation, we relate the shocked LFs to the LFs of the shock fronts, 

ΓRS ,3 ≈ Γ3 

> 2ΓRS

→ Γ3 = 2𝜎 1/24 ΓRS ; ΓFS ≈ 2ΓFS ,2Γ2 → Γ2 ≈ ΓFS 

> 2𝜎 1/21

(A4) and by equating the shocked LFs 

ΓFS = 4ΓRS (𝜎 1𝜎 4)1/2. (A5) At the same time, we can relate the shock front LFs to the unshocked media ΓRS ,4 ≈ Γ4/( 2ΓRS ), ΓFS ,1 ≈ ΓFS /( 2Γ1) and use the pressure equilibrium (left part of Eq. A3), to find 

ΓRS ΓFS = Γ 1Γ4

 𝑛 4𝑚 4

𝑛 1𝑚 1

1/2

(A6) Combining with Eq. A5, we arrive at expressions for the shock front LFs that depend only on unshocked flow properties 

Γ2FS = 4Γ1Γ4

 𝑛 4 𝑚 4 

> 𝑛 1𝑚 1

1/2

(𝜎 1𝜎 4)1/2 ; Γ2RS = 

> Γ1Γ4

 𝑛 4 𝑚 4 

> 𝑛 1𝑚 1

1/2   

> 4(𝜎 1𝜎 4)1/2

It is useful to consider also the LFs of the shock fronts relative to the respective undisturbed media they are running into: 

ΓFS ,1 =

 Γ4

Γ1

1/2  𝑛 4𝑚 4

𝑛 1𝑚 1

1/4

(𝜎 1𝜎 4)1/4 ; ΓRS ,4 =

 Γ4

Γ1

1/2  𝑛 1𝑚 1

𝑛 4𝑚 4

1/4

(𝜎 1𝜎 4)1/4 (A7) The strong shock conditions Γ2RS ,4 ≫ 𝜎 4, Γ2FS ,1 ≫ 𝜎 1 can now be translated to a self-consistency requirement 

 Γ1

Γ4

2

< 𝑛 4𝑚 4𝜎 4

𝑛 1𝑚 1𝜎 1

<

 Γ4

Γ1

2

(A8) Violation of the LHS inequality means the FS is weak and violation of the RHS inequality means the RS is weak. In particular, when the wind is non-relativistic, we see that only the latter poses a concern, and that large enough ejecta magnetization suppresses the RS. These results are consistent with the classic result by Sari & Piran (1995) in the unmagnetized limit, which corresponds here to 𝜎 4, 𝜎 1 being O( 1) (since we have implicitly assumed 𝜎 + 1 ≈ 𝜎 above). In the strong shocks limit, the shocked LF is given by 

Γ2 = Γ 3 ≈ ( Γ1Γ4)1/2

 𝑛 4𝑚 4

𝑛 1𝑚 1

1/4  𝜎 4

𝜎 1

1/4

→

 Γ2

Γ1

4

=

 Γ4

Γ1

2 𝑛 4𝑚 4𝜎 4

𝑛 1𝑚 1𝜎 1

(A9) In particular, we can plug this into Eq.24, and find (using the notation of that section, i.e. ej ⇔ 4, w ⇔ 1)

𝐿 FRB = 𝜀 ma 𝐿 𝑒 

 Γ2

Γ1

4

≈ 𝐿 ej 𝜀 ma 

𝑚 𝑒 

𝑚 w

(1 + 𝜎 w)−1 (A10) 14 where 𝐿 ej = 4𝜋𝑅 2𝜎 ej 𝑛 ej 𝑚 ej 𝑐 3Γ2ej is the total luminosity of the ejecta. We consider next the energy of the FRB relative to that of the ejecta. The energy density in the shocked wind frame (region 2) is 𝑢 2 ≈ 𝑛 1 (1 + 𝜎 1)𝑚 1𝑐 2

 Γ2

> Γ1

2

. In the central engine frame, the energy density is enhanced by a factor of Γ22 . The volume of the shocked region in the same frame is 𝑉 ∼ 4𝜋𝑅 3/Γ22 . Put together, we find that the total energy of the shocked plasma in region 2 is 

𝐸 2 ≈ 4𝜋𝑅 3𝑛 1𝑚 1 (1 + 𝜎 1)𝑐 2

 Γ2

Γ1

2

(A11) At the deceleration radius this energy is comparable to the ejecta energy, 𝐸 2 = 𝐸 ej . Re-expressing in terms of 𝐿 FRB and 𝑡 FRB and adjusting the notation as above, we get 

𝐸 FRB = 𝐿 FRB 𝑡 FRB = 𝐸 ej 

18 𝜀 ma 

𝑚 𝑒 

𝑚 w

(1 + 𝜎 w)−2. (A12) Therefore, we find that the total efficiency of synchrotron maser (in the sense of converting energy being produced by the source to maser energy being radiated away), is 

𝜀 tot = 18 𝜀 ma 

𝑚 𝑒 

𝑚 w

(1 + 𝜎 w)−2. (A13) This energy-based efficiency is smaller by a factor of 8(1 + 𝜎 w) ≫ 1 as compared to the luminosity-based efficiency. This is a reflection of the fact that the duration of the FRB is smaller by the same factor as compared with the duration of the ejecta. The efficiency estimate can be understood physically as arising from the fact that the magnetization parameters on the two sides of a shock front are equal up to a factor of order unity (see eq. A1). Thus, the fraction of energy carried by electrons in region 2 is 𝑚 𝑒 /( 𝑚 w𝜎 w) relative to the total in that region. In addition, beyond the deceleration radius, more than half of the energy of the magnetar ejecta resides in the shocked CSM, i.e. region 2. It follows, therefore, that a fraction 𝜖 ma of the electron luminosity in region 2 is converted to radio waves. Since the observed duration is compressed by a factor of (1 + 𝜎 w), we see that overall a fraction ∼ 𝜖 ma 𝑚 𝑒 /[ 𝑚 w (1 + 𝜎 w)2] of the ejecta’s energy is converted into radio waves. REFERENCES 

Babul, A.-N., & Sironi, L. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 2884, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2612 Baring, M. G., & Harding, A. K. 2001, ApJ, 547, 929, doi: 10.1086/318390 Beloborodov, A. M. 2013, ApJ, 777, 114, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/777/2/114 —. 2017, ApJL, 843, L26, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa78f3 —. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1908.07743. https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.07743 —. 2021, ApJL, 922, L7, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac2fa0 —. 2023, ApJ, 959, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acf659 —. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.10189. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.10189 Beloborodov, A. M., & Thompson, C. 2007, ApJ, 657, 967, doi: 10.1086/508917 Beniamini, P., & Kumar, P. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 651, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2489 —. 2023, MNRAS, 519, 5345, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad028 —. 2025, ApJ, 982, 45, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb8e6 Bernardi, D., Yuan, Y., & Chen, A. Y. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2506.04175, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.04175 Blaes, O., Blandford, R., Goldreich, P., & Madau, P. 1989, ApJ, 343, 839, doi: 10.1086/167754 Burnaz, L., Most, E. R., & Bransgrove, A. 2025, ApJL, 995, L57, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae2466 Buschauer, R., & Benford, G. 1976, MNRAS, 177, 109, doi: 10.1093/mnras/177.1.109 Chen, A. Y., Yuan, Y., Li, X., & Mahlmann, J. F. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2210.13506, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.13506 Cooper, A. J., & Wadiasingh, Z. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 2133, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1813 Cooper, A. J., & Wijers, R. A. M. J. 2021, MNRAS, 508, L32, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slab099 Cordes, J. M. 1979, SSRv, 24, 567, doi: 10.1007/BF00172214 Enoto, T., Terasawa, T., Kisaka, S., et al. 2021, Science, 372, 187, doi: 10.1126/science.abd4659 Goldreich, P., & Julian, W. H. 1969, ApJ, 157, 869, doi: 10.1086/150119 Grehan, M. P., Ripperda, B., Beloborodov, A. M., Thompson, C., & Most, E. R. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.21290, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.21290 Hankins, T. H., & Eilek, J. A. 2007, ApJ, 670, 693, doi: 10.1086/522362 15 

Hankins, T. H., Kern, J. S., Weatherall, J. C., & Eilek, J. A. 2003, Nature, 422, 141, doi: 10.1038/nature01477 Harding, A. K., & Muslimov, A. G. 2011, ApJ, 743, 181, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/743/2/181 Harding, A. K., Wadiasingh, Z., & Baring, M. G. 2025, ApJ, 991, 178, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfa06 Hessels, J. W. T., Spitler, L. G., Seymour, A. D., et al. 2019, ApJL, 876, L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab13ae Hewitt, D. M., Hessels, J. W. T., Ould-Boukattine, O. S., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 526, 2039, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2847 Hirotani, K. 2006, ApJ, 652, 1475, doi: 10.1086/508317 Iwamoto, M., Matsumoto, Y., Amano, T., Matsukiyo, S., & Hoshino, M. 2024, PhRvL, 132, 035201, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.035201 Jessner, A., Popov, M. V., Kondratiev, V. I., et al. 2010, A&A, 524, A60, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014806 Kennel, C. F., & Coroniti, F. V. 1984, ApJ, 283, 694, doi: 10.1086/162356 Kirk, J. G., Lyubarsky, Y., & Petri, J. 2009, in Astrophysics and Space Science Library, Vol. 357, Astrophysics and Space Science Library, ed. W. Becker, 421, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-76965-1_16 Kumar, P., Beniamini, P., Gupta, O., & Cordes, J. M. 2024a, MNRAS, 527, 457, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3010 Kumar, P., & Bošnjak, Ž. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2385, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa774 Kumar, P., & Lu, W. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 1217, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa801 Kumar, P., Lu, W., & Bhattacharya, M. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 2726, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx665 Kumar, P., Qu, Y., & Zhang, B. 2024b, ApJ, 974, 160, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6cda Lu, W., & Kumar, P. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2470, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty716 Lyubarsky, Y. 2008, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 983, 40 Years of Pulsars: Millisecond Pulsars, Magnetars and More, ed. C. Bassa, Z. Wang, A. Cumming, & V. M. Kaspi (AIP), 29–37, doi: 10.1063/1.2900170 Lyubarsky, Y. 2014, MNRAS, 442, L9, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slu046 —. 2020, ApJ, 897, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab97b5 Lyutikov, M. 2021, ApJ, 922, 166, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac1b32 —. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 2180, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae591 Mahlmann, J. F., Philippov, A. A., Levinson, A., Spitkovsky, A., & Hakobyan, H. 2022, ApJL, 932, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac7156 Majid, W. A., Pearlman, A. B., Prince, T. A., et al. 2021, ApJL, 919, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac1921 Manaswini, N., Hewitt, D. M., Spitler, L. G., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.28012, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.28012 Manchester, R. N., Hobbs, G. B., Teoh, A., & Hobbs, M. 2005, AJ, 129, 1993, doi: 10.1086/428488 Margalit, B., Beniamini, P., Sridhar, N., & Metzger, B. D. 2020a, ApJL, 899, L27, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abac57 Margalit, B., Metzger, B. D., & Sironi, L. 2020b, MNRAS, 494, 4627, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1036 Mckinven, R., Bhardwaj, M., Eftekhari, T., et al. 2025, Nature, 637, 43, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08184-4 Melrose, D. B. 1978, ApJ, 225, 557, doi: 10.1086/156516 Metzger, B. D., Margalit, B., & Sironi, L. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 4091, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz700 Narayan, R., Kumar, P., & Tchekhovskoy, A. 2011, MNRAS, 416, 2193, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19197.x Nimmo, K., Hessels, J. W. T., Keimpema, A., et al. 2021, Nature Astronomy, 5, 594, doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01321-3 Nimmo, K., Pleunis, Z., Beniamini, P., et al. 2025, Nature, 637, 48, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08297-w Niu, J. R., Wang, W. Y., Jiang, J. C., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2407.10540, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2407.10540 Philippov, A., Timokhin, A., & Spitkovsky, A. 2020, PhRvL, 124, 245101, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.245101 Philippov, A., Uzdensky, D. A., Spitkovsky, A., & Cerutti, B. 2019, ApJL, 876, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab1590 Plotnikov, I., & Sironi, L. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 3816, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz640 Qu, Y., & Bransgrove, A. 2026, ApJ, 998, 190, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae3a9d Qu, Y., & Kumar, P. 2026 Qu, Y., Kumar, P., & Zhang, B. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 2020, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1910 Qu, Y., & Zhang, B. 2024, ApJ, 972, 124, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5d5b Qu, Y., Zhang, B., & Kumar, P. 2026, ApJ, 997, 37, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae285e Ruderman, M. A., & Sutherland, P. G. 1975, ApJ, 196, 51, doi: 10.1086/153393 Sand, K. R., Curtin, A. P., Michilli, D., et al. 2025, ApJ, 979, 160, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9b11 Sari, R., & Piran, T. 1995, ApJL, 455, L143, doi: 10.1086/309835 Shah, V., Hessels, J. W. T., Kaspi, V. M., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.19335, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.19335 Shannon, R. M., Macquart, J. P., Bannister, K. W., et al. 2018, Nature, 562, 386, doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0588-y Snelders, M. P., Nimmo, K., Hessels, J. W. T., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy, 7, 1486, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-02101-x Sturrock, P. A. 1971, ApJ, 164, 529, doi: 10.1086/150865 Thompson, C., & Duncan, R. C. 1995, MNRAS, 275, 255, doi: 10.1093/mnras/275.2.255 Timokhin, A. N. 2010, MNRAS, 408, 2092, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17286.x 16 

Timokhin, A. N., Eichler, D., & Lyubarsky, Y. 2008, ApJ, 680, 1398, doi: 10.1086/587925 Timokhin, A. N., & Harding, A. K. 2019, ApJ, 871, 12, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf050 van Hoven, M., & Levin, Y. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1036, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17499.x Vanthieghem, A., & Levinson, A. 2025, PhRvL, 134, 035201, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.134.035201 Wadiasingh, Z., & Timokhin, A. 2019, ApJ, 879, 4, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2240 Wu, H.-C. 2024, ApJL, 974, L21, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad8154 Yang, Y.-P., & Zhang, B. 2018, ApJ, 868, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae685 Zhang, B. 2022, ApJ, 925, 53, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3979 Zhang, Y.-K., Li, D., Zhang, B., et al. 2023, ApJ, 955, 142, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aced0b Zhou, D. J., Han, J. L., Zhang, B., et al. 2022, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 22, 124001, doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/ac98f8 Zhu, Y., Niu, C., Dai, S., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.17696. https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17696