Title: The Contribution of Disrupted Dense Star Clusters to Gaia's Compact Object Binaries

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.18419v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 00:11:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> Draft version June 18, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

The Contribution of Disrupted Dense Star Clusters to Gaia’s Compact Object Binaries 

Aryanna Schiebelbein-Zwack ,1, 2 Claire S. Ye ,2 Marta Reina-Campos ,2, 3, 4 Aeysha Munawwarah, 1

Kareem El-Badry ,5 and Pranav Nagarajan 5

> 1David A. Dunlap Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St George St, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H4, Canada
> 2Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 60 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H8, Canada
> 3Department of Physics & Astronomy, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, L8S 4M1, Canada
> 4Instituto Galego de F´ ısica de Altas Enerx´ ıas, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain
> 5Department of Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA, 91125, USA

ABSTRACT We present the first model of the Milky Way’s detectable compact object–luminous star binary population from disrupted dense star clusters. We bridge large-scale cosmological star cluster formation with high-resolution dynamical evolution of compact object binaries by mapping the predicted star clusters from the EMP-Pathfinder simulations to N -body Cluster Monte Carlo models. We predict that approximately 3 × 10 5 white dwarfs (WDs), 1 .5 × 10 5 black holes (BHs), and 1 × 10 3 neutron stars (NSs) in binaries with luminous companions are released to the Galaxy from now-disrupted dense star clusters throughout the history of the Milky Way. Synthetic observations modeled with the gaiamock pipeline reveal that the modeled Gaia DR3 yields are sparse ( ≈ 2 WDs, 0 NS, 0 BHs at 90% credibility), with the majority lying beyond the detection horizon. Gaia DR4 is expected to increase the observational yield of these systems only marginally, as the benefits of an expanded search volume are largely offset by the diminished astrometric and photometric precision of more distant sources ( ≈ 14 WDs, 0 NS, 0 BHs). While the underlying BH binary population is similar to that of WDs, they are detected far less frequently; they tend to pair with lower-mass, dimmer companions and have less temporal coverage of their long orbital periods. For NSs, we suggest that the observed over-representation of metal-poor, halo systems is inconsistent with an origin in disrupted dense star clusters. Instead, the observed Gaia NS population could reflect the accretion history of metal-poor, dwarf galaxies into the Milky Way, isolated binary star evolution, or supernova physics. 

1. INTRODUCTION The Gaia survey mission has collected astrometry for over a billion stars, ≈ 1% of the Galactic population (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016, 2021; El-Badry 2024a). Gaia’s third data release (DR3) contains the first or-bital solutions for their binaries, expanding the sample in the literature by a factor of 50 (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2021; El-Badry 2024a). This wealth of data has transformed the landscape of stellar binary studies with expanded coverage of binary parameters and increased discovery potential for exotic and rare configurations in-forming models of binary star formation and evolution (e.g. Chawla et al. 2022; Rubio et al. 2025a; Yamaguchi et al. 2025a). Furthermore, these binaries’ Galactic kine-

> Corresponding author: Aryanna Schiebelbein-Zwack aryanna.schiebelbein@mail.utoronto.ca

matics and orbital architectures may also be influenced by the dynamics of their host star clusters (e.g. Kremer et al. 2020; Cournoyer-Cloutier et al. 2024), the Galactic tidal field (e.g. Kaib & Raymond 2014), and the Milky Way assembly history (e.g. El-Badry & Rix 2019; Tian et al. 2020; Bashi et al. 2024). Following Gaia’s DR3 (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2021), observational catalogs of candidate white dwarfs (WDs; e.g., El-Badry et al. 2021; Shahaf et al. 2023), neutron stars (NSs; El-Badry et al. 2024c), and black holes (BHs; El-Badry et al. 2023a,b; Gaia Collabora-tion et al. 2024) as unseen companions to luminous stars are rapidly emerging. Among the most striking discov-eries is Gaia BH3, a ≈ 33 M⊙ BH with a metal-poor ([Fe/H] ≈ − 2.6) companion (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2024; El-Badry 2024b; Mar´ ın Pina et al. 2024a). This system has been chemically and kinematically associ-ated with the ED-2 stellar stream, originating from a 

> arXiv:2606.18419v1 [astro-ph.GA] 16 Jun 2026

2 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al. 

disrupted star cluster (Balbinot et al. 2024; El-Badry 2024b; Mar´ ın Pina et al. 2024a). Similarly, there are potential hints of cluster origins for the Gaia NS sys-tems. Observed NS binaries with metal-poor compan-ions and halo orbits are significantly over-represented: they constitute ≈ 14% (3 out of 21) of candidate NS systems, in stark contrast to the ∼ 0.5% (61 out of 11,420) found among binaries in the parent Gaia sam-ple (El-Badry et al. 2024c). Discoveries such as these are only expected to increase with future data releases; Gaia DR3 produced ≈ 170 , 000 orbital solutions, and DR4 is expected to increase this by at least a factor of 

≈ 5 (El-Badry et al. 2024a). In addition to being frequently located in the halo, these Gaia compact object (CO) binaries are also no-table for their typically wide, eccentric orbits. The NS candidates have a median eccentricity of e = 0 .4and periods ranging from 100 − 1000 days (El-Badry et al. 2024c). Similarly, the Gaia BHs have e > 0.4and periods ranging from 10 − 1000s of days (El-Badry et al. 2023a,b; Gaia Collaboration et al. 2024). While the WDs binaries have a population of low-mass WDs (M < 0.8M⊙) in low-eccentricity ( e < 0.2) orbits (Shahaf et al. 2023), a subset of more massive WDs (M > 1.0M⊙) are in binaries that display a broad ec-centricity distribution, with a tail extending to e ≈ 0.8(El-Badry et al. 2024c). Several studies have sought to explain the origins of these wide, eccentric binaries, yet their stellar phyloge-nies remain elusive. Isolated binary evolution requires fine-tuning of mass transfer processes and supernova na-tal kicks. The present-day orbital separations of many of these WD, NS, and BH binaries overlap with the radii of the COs’ giant star progenitors, implying they should have experienced common envelope evolution, yet their orbits remain wide and eccentric (El-Badry et al. 2024c; Gaia Collaboration et al. 2024; Shahaf et al. 2024; Yam-aguchi et al. 2024, 2025b). Moreover, systems like Gaia NS1 ( M = 1 .90 ± 0.04 M⊙; e = 0 .122 ± 0.002) chal-lenge supernova kick prescriptions, as current models often predict stronger natal kicks for more massive NS remnants (Burrows et al. 2023; El-Badry et al. 2024d). Dynamical formation in star clusters has been invoked to address the challenges of isolated binary evolution and explain Gaia BH3 in the ED-2 stream. Indeed, re-cent work by Mar´ ın Pina et al. (2024b) showed that dense star clusters are capable of producing Gaia BH3-like systems. However, the broader results are conflict-ing. Some studies find that young and open star clusters efficiently produce wide, eccentric BH–star binaries but overpredict the Gaia DR3 observations, while simultane-ously finding that isolated binaries cannot reproduce ob-servations (Di Carlo et al. 2024; Nagarajan et al. 2025). Others suggest that the formation efficiency of detached BH–star binaries in young and open clusters is compa-rable to isolated binary evolution (Kotko et al. 2024). Overall, while these studies have consistently sug-gested that star clusters can produce Gaia BH bina-ries, the formation of Gaia NS binaries remains under-explored. One study, Tanikawa et al. (2024), argues that these systems are unlikely to originate from open star clusters because most NSs are ejected via super-nova natal kicks. Instead, they propose that these sys-tems originate from isolated binaries, which requires the aforementioned fine-tuning. Given the aforementioned association of Gaia BH3 with a now-disrupted star cluster and the overabun-dance of metal-poor Gaia NSs on halo orbits, disrupted dense clusters emerge as a potentially rich yet largely un-explored channel for binary star production. Since most clusters that formed at high redshift, similar to today’s metal-poor GCs in the Milky Way, have since dissolved into the Galactic field, the Gaia binaries found in the field today could potentially be surviving remnants of these dynamical environments. The contribution of dis-rupted dense star clusters to various types of Gaia CO systems remains to be determined. Inspired by these recent perplexing discoveries and the discovery potential of upcoming data releases, we ex-plore for the first time the impact of dissolved star clus-ters on the Gaia-like CO population in the Milky Way. In this work, we bridge the gap between the small-scale physics of binary star evolution and stellar dynamics in dense star clusters with the large-scale evolution of star clusters within the Galaxy. Our approach differs from previous work in two major aspects. Firstly, we focus on disrupted dense clusters, using the properties of star clusters from the EMP-Pathfinder simulations, a state-of-the-art suite of hydrodynamic galaxy formation simulations with sub-grid star cluster evolution and dis-ruption (Reina-Campos et al. 2022). Secondly, this work expands the analysis to all types of stellar remnants. By combining the EMP-Pathfinder clusters with the stellar dynamics modeled by the Cluster Monte Carlo (CMC )code (Rodriguez et al. 2022; Kremer et al. 2020), we track the journey of CO binaries from their birth in dense environments to their eventual release and evo-lution in the Galactic field. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the EMP-Pathfinder cosmological simulations, which produce the first key ingredient in our model, the dense star clusters. In particular, we discuss how cluster evolution and dissolution are modeled, and examine the properties of the simulated star clusters. We describe Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 3the CMC models in Section 3, which provide our second model ingredient, the internal dynamical processes of star clusters. Our methodology for combining these two models is detailed in Section 4, as well as the resulting binaries that emerge from this model. Section 5 covers the simulation of the Gaia observation pipeline, wherein we determine which of our simulated binaries are ob-servable. Section 6 gives an overview of some of the uncertainties and caveats associated with our model, as well as a discussion on the possible formation pathways for the Gaia COs. We conclude in Section 7 and give an outlook of what our results indicate for the Gaia CO binary population.  

> 2.

EMP-PATHFINDER : STAR CLUSTER FORMATION AND DISRUPTION IN COSMOLOGICAL SIMULATIONS 2.1. The EMP-Pathfinder Simulations 

Star clusters are inextricably linked to the galaxy they reside within. As a consequence, it is necessary to self-consistently model star clusters alongside their host galaxy to accurately predict their properties and evolu-tion. To do so, we use the simulated star clusters from the EMP-Pathfinder simulations (Reina-Campos et al. 2022). These simulations model the formation, evolu-tion, and disruption of star clusters within galaxies over the lifetime of the Universe using a sub-grid approach 1.In this setup, star clusters form and evolve at run-time as their host galaxies assemble over cosmic time. Of particular interest for this project, the EMP-Pathfinder 

simulations are a suite of zoom-in cosmological simula-tions of Milky Way-mass galaxies. Among the characteristics of the EMP galaxy forma-tion model, one stands out: the inclusion of the physics of the multiphase nature of the interstellar medium is critical for modelling the disruption of star clusters. EMP couples the non-equilibrium heating and cooling networks from the GRACKLE library (Smith et al. 2017) into AREPO (Springel 2010), which allows the gas to reach temperatures as low as 10 K (Reina-Campos et al. 2022). By allowing the gas to cool down, the in-terstellar medium develops the cold, dense clouds that dominate most of cluster disruption via tidal shocks (e.g. Baumgardt & Makino 2003; Lamers et al. 2005; Gieles et al. 2006; Elmegreen 2010; Elmegreen & Hunter 2010; Kruijssen et al. 2012; Miholics et al. 2017; Reina- 

> 1The simulations are an expanded and upgraded version of the MOdelling Star cluster population Assembly In Cosmological Simulations (MOSAICS; Kruijssen et al. 2011) and the MO-SAICS within EAGLE (E-MOSAICS; Pfeffer et al. 2018; Krui-jssen et al. 2019) projects.

Campos et al. 2022). Only under these conditions, the simulated old star clusters show a mass distribution in agreement with that of GCs in the Milky Way and M31. The fiducial cluster subgrid model makes three impor-tant assumptions regarding how star clusters form. The first is that the fraction of the stellar mass forming in gravitationally bound clusters is environmentally depen-dent, increasing the bound fraction when the interstel-lar medium has a higher gas pressure (Kruijssen 2012). The second assumption is that the initial mass function follows a doubly-exponential Schechter function, where both extremes increase in environments with higher gas pressures (Trujillo-Gomez et al. 2019). Lastly, the initial half-mass radius of the star clusters is set to rh = 4 pc and it does not evolve over time. Additionally, the star formation efficiency is constant. As clusters age, they lose mass via three mecha-nisms: stellar evolution, dynamical processes and dy-namical friction. Dynamical processes encompass relax-ation and tidal shocks. Two-body interactions within the cluster lead to a slow, but continuous disruption of the cluster (e.g. Ambartsumian 1938; Spitzer 1940; H´ enon 1961), whereas sudden and strong variations of the tidal field (i.e. tidal shocks) caused by overdensi-ties in the interstellar medium or galactic disk cross-ings dominate the mass loss of star clusters (e.g. Baum-gardt & Makino 2003; Lamers et al. 2005; Gieles et al. 2006; Elmegreen 2010; Elmegreen & Hunter 2010; Mi-holics et al. 2017). Dynamical friction, whereby clusters lose energy through gravitational interactions with other bodies in the Galaxy and fall towards the Galactic cen-tre, is accounted for in post-processing. Clusters are considered disrupted when the timescale of dynamical friction is shorter than their age. Taking all these pro-cesses together, star clusters lose most of their mass via tidal shocks while they orbit their parent galaxy, but shock-driven disruption becomes subdominant if they are ejected to the halo of the galaxy, allowing them to survive for longer. In addition to the impact of the galactic environment on the formation, evolution, and survival of a cluster, the internal dynamics of the clusters are also of vital importance. The subgrid clusters spatial profile distri-butions are described by a King profile with concentra-tion parameter W0 = 5, which is the same initial profile adopted by the CMC models, discussed in Section 3. This ensures that our coupling of these two models is optimal. 2.2. Properties of The Disrupted Dense Clusters 

In this work, we use the simulation MW22 from Reina-Campos et al. (2022), and focus on studying fully dis-rupted massive star clusters (i.e. initially more massive 4 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al.             

> Figure 1. Left: The lifetime of EMP-Pathfinder disrupted clusters vs. their initial mass. Due to the assumption of a constant initial half-mass radius, these quantities are correlated; more massive clusters tend to have longer lifetimes. Right: Cluster metallicity vs. initial mass, for EMP-Pathfinder clusters that disrupt (blue), as well as globular cluster analogues (orange). In the simulation, ≈70% of the clusters disrupt. Of the survivors, only ≈2% are older than 10 Gyr and are similar in number and mass to the observed Milky Way GCs (Reina-Campos et al. 2022). These clusters cover a wide range of metallicities and masses, notably overlapping with the CMC cluster models described in Section 3.

than 10 5 M⊙ and disrupted by the present day). The properties of the disrupted massive star clusters, simi-lar to GCs and their progenitors ( ≥ 10 5 M⊙), are shown in Figures 1 and 2. As shown in Fig. 1, star clusters with larger initial masses tend to stay bound longer be-fore disrupting due to their deeper gravitational well and longer two-body relaxation time. Since the disruption mechanisms are inversely dependent on the density of the star cluster, the assumption of a constant half-mass radius implies that their mass loss is solely modulated by their mass. Many clusters are disrupted later in their life, as shown by the cluster lifetimes beyond a few Gyr in Fig. 1, and there is adequate time for the dynami-cal evolution of COs to become relevant. Fig. 1 also shows the metallicity of the disrupted clusters. This range of metallicities overlaps with those of the CMC mod-els discussed in Section 3. We note that the sample of model clusters from EMP-Pathfinder with metallicities near that of Gaia BH3 ([Fe/H] ≈ − 2.6) is sparse. While this highlights the lower metallicity regime as a valuable area for future Galactic simulations to explore, we do not expect this sparsity to bias our results. CO formation appear to be relatively insensitive to metallicity below approximately 0 .1 Z⊙ (e.g., [ F e/H ] ≲ −1), a range for which our catalog maintains adequate coverage (e.g. van Son et al. 2025). In Fig. 2, it can be seen that most disrupted clusters are located beyond the approximate detection horizon of Gaia DR3, which is below 3 kpc (El-Badry 2024a; El-Badry et al. 2024a). However, the upper distance limit of DR4 (10 kpc; El-Badry et al. 2024a; Nagara-jan et al. 2025) coincides with the peak of the disrupted cluster distance distribution from the Sun, as this hori-zon encompasses the Galactic center where the major-ity of clusters disrupt. Thus, the discovery potential of binaries originating from disrupted dense clusters will increase immensely in DR4. Note that while some bina-ries may be detected out to these distance limits, many will remain undetected due to other observational con-straints, such as magnitude and orbital period. We ac-count for the combination of these effects on detectabil-ity in Section 5. The galactocentric radii of the clusters following dis-ruption indicate that most clusters disrupt nearer to the Galactic center than the Sun, which is located at 8.24 ±0.2 kpc (Bobylev 2023). This is also shown clearly in Fig. 3, which displays the spatial distribution of the dense clusters throughout the Milky Way. The Sun is Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 5            

> Figure 2. Left: The cluster distances from the Sun, for a single realization of the Sun’s position in the Galaxy. The dashed (dotted) line shows generous upper limits on the detection horizon for Gaia DR3 (DR4). Of the disrupted clusters, ≈0.6% are within the DR3 limit of 3 kpc and ≈70% are within that of DR4 at 10 kpc. Middle: The galactocentric radii of the clusters in the snapshot directly after disruption. Most clusters disrupt closer to the Galactic centre than the Sun, which is located at 8.24 kpc. These values overlap with those of the CMC models (see Section 3). Right: The age of the Universe at the time of cluster disruption.

shown at z = 0 .0208 kpc and r = 8 .24 kpc (Bennett & Bovy 2019; Bobylev 2023). In this work, we compute 100 realizations by rotating the position of the Solar System throughout the Milky Way-mass galaxy. Accounting for the slight variations that occur from rotating the Solar position in the Galaxy, we find that 0.3–0.6% of the sam-ple lies within 3 kpc of the Sun, while roughly 65–70% falls within 10 kpc (90% credible regions). We also show the age of the Universe at disruption, which is equal to the sum of the time at cluster for-mation and the cluster lifetime. The age at disruption determines the length of time over which the binaries are evolved forward to the present day (see Section 4). Overall, the EMP-Pathfinder simulations provide a state-of-the-art model of the cluster population within our Galaxy. By incorporating a physically rigorous treatment of cluster disruption, these simulations suc-cessfully reproduce the distribution of Milky Way clus-ters observed today. However, modeling the formation of Gaia binaries requires a detailed treatment of stel-lar populations and internal cluster dynamics. For this, we turn to N -body dynamical models of dense stellar environments.  

> 3.

CMC: BINARY EVOLUTION AND DYNAMICS IN DENSE STAR CLUSTERS To characterize CO binaries originating from dis-rupted dense star clusters, we map the properties of the dissolved clusters from EMP-Pathfinder onto Monte Carlo N -body simulations run with the Cluster Monte Carlo code ( CMC ; Rodriguez et al. 2022). CMC accounts various relevant physics for cluster evolution, includ-ing two-body relaxation, strong three- and four-body dynamical interactions, and mass loss through galactic tidal potential. Binary and single star evolution is fully coupled to stellar dynamics and is computed with the binary population synthesis code COSMIC (Breivik et al. 2020). We use a catalog of CMC simulations (Kremer et al. 2020) covering a wide range of initial cluster masses (M = 1 .2 × 10 5, 2 .4 × 10 5, 4 .8 × 10 5, and 9 .7 × 10 5 M⊙), initial virial radii ( rv =0.5, 1, 2, and 4 pc), metallic-ities ( Z =0.0002, 0.002, and 0.02), and galactocentric distances ( rg =2, 8, and 20 kpc). These simulations are evolved for a Hubble time, and the model clusters’ properties at the present day match well with those of observed Milky Way GCs. These simulations can thus be used to represent dense, massive disrupted clusters. All CMC catalog models adopt a standard Kroupa ini-tial mass function (Kroupa 2001) and assume a uniform initial binary fraction of 5%, independent of the primary mass. The initial properties of the binaries are sam-pled from a variety of relations. The secondary masses of these binaries are drawn from a uniform mass ratio 

q ∈ [0 .1, 1] of the primary mass (Duquennoy & Mayor 1991), and the initial binary orbital periods are sampled from a log-uniform distribution independent of mass (e.g., Duquennoy & Mayor 1991) ranging from near-contact [ ≥ 5( R1 + R2), where R1 and R2 are the radii of the binary component stars] to the hard/soft bound-ary. Note that this prevents the model from forming primordial BH binaries with solar-mass companions, as BH progenitors have initial masses M ⪆ 20 M⊙ (e.g., Heger et al. 2023). However, as shown in Fig. 1, the average cluster lifetime prior to disruption is several bil-lion years. Over this timescale, most primordial BH bi-naries likely undergo significant dynamical interactions, 6 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al.    

> Figure 3. The spatial locations of the disrupted massive star clusters from EMP-Pathfinder within a simulated Milky Way-like galaxy, directly following their disruption, in cartesian coordinates. The possible locations of the Sun throughout the Galaxy are shown by the orange annulus. We rotate the location of the Solar System around the X-Y plane to account for the stochastic spatial variation of clusters in the Galaxy relative to an observer. An example realization of the Solar System’s location is indicated by the orange star. The Gaia observation horizons are approximate and most binaries will remain undetectable even within the indicated radii.

effectively shifting their companion mass distribution to match that of the dynamically formed BH binaries in our model. Finally, the initial binary eccentricities are sampled from a thermal distribution (e.g., Heggie 1975). The CMC clusters adopt the ‘rapid model’ for BH and NS formation from core-collapse supernovae (Fryer et al. 2012). In this model, NSs receive natal kicks vNS drawn from a Maxwellian distribution with velocity dispersion 

σCCSN = 265 km s −1 (Hobbs et al. 2005), while BHs re-ceive fallback-modulated kicks that scale with vNS and the mass fraction ff b of the stellar envelope that falls back during core collapse vBH = (1 − ff b )vNS . In ad-dition, NSs can form via electron-capture supernovae, which occur when the oxygen–neon core of a star or an oxygen–neon WD reaches a critical mass near the Chandrasekhar limit and collapses due to electron cap-ture and the resulting loss of electron pressure (e.g., Miyaji et al. 1980; Nomoto 1984, 1987). In this case, we assume the NSs receive small natal kicks drawn from a Maxwellian distribution with velocity dispersion 

σECSN = 20 km s −1 (Kiel et al. 2008). Most NSs retained in dense star clusters, where the typical escape velocity is ≲ 100 km s −1, form via electron-capture supernovae (e.g., see Ye et al. 2019, for more details).  

> 4.

COMPACT OBJECT-STAR BINARIES FROM DISRUPTED DENSE STAR CLUSTERS 4.1. Mapping from the EMP-Pathfinder Clusters to 

CMC Binaries 

As discussed and shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the disrupted massive clusters in EMP-Pathfinder have continuous distributions in initial masses, metallicities, and galacto-centric radii. In contrast, the CMC models consist of grids in these properties as explained in Section 3. To bridge the EMP-Pathfinder simulated clusters to the CMC mod-els, for each disrupted cluster from EMP-Pathfinder we select the closest model from the CMC suite using two mapping techniques. First, we map only by the initial cluster masses: the ‘Mass’ map. The other properties, metallicity and virial radius, are drawn randomly from the relevant values for the CMC catalog models. Sec-ond, we additionally account for cluster metallicities: the ‘Mass + Metal’ map. The EMP-Pathfinder metallic-ities (Figure 1) are grouped into three bins, Z ≤ 0.00065, 0.00065 < Z ≤ 0.0065, and Z > 0.0065, centered on the three metallicities of the CMC catalog models. We then extract CO binaries from the selected CMC clusters at approximately the cluster disruption time inferred from EMP-Pathfinder (Figure 1). We also track binaries that were ejected from the clusters prior to the disruption. Since the EMP-Pathfinder cluster models have no set virial radius, for each disrupted cluster matched in mass and metallicity, we randomly draw an initial virial ra-Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 7          

> Figure 4. The property distributions of CO binary systems sampled from CMC for different mappings from EMP-Pathfinder .Blue lines indicate that the CMC /EMP-Pathfinder mapping was done based on mass alone. Pink lines indicate that the mapping additionally accounts for metallicity. The different linestyles represent three different random draws, showing that the results are robust against random noise. The mapping that includes metallicity has slightly less support at higher CO masses because the EMP-Pathfinder disrupted clusters have a high concentration at metallicities above [ F e/H ] = −0.3 = 1 /2Z⊙. Since these more massive COs are missing, the ‘Mass+Metal’ map also has fewer binaries with large eccentricities and long periods. An approximate range of observable periods (100-2000 days; M¨ uller-Horn et al. 2025) in Gaia DR3 is shown in shaded grey.
> Figure 5. The properties of COs in binaries with luminous companions released to the Galactic field from disrupted dense clusters. Most of these binaries contain a WD, followed by BHs, while NSs are the least numerous. The WDs have comparatively shorter periods and orbits that are more circular compared to the other COs. The dynamically formed binaries (all NS and BH binaries in this study) extend to low eccentricities, showcasing that low eccentricity is not necessarily indicative of a lack of dynamics. The BHs also favour lower mass companions compared to the WDs, making them more difficult to observe.

dius for the CMC catalog models. The extracted CO-containing binaries are then evolved to the present day from the time of cluster disruption with the COSMIC bi-nary population synthesis package (Breivik et al. 2020). Furthermore, due to mass segregation, most CO binaries are concentrated in the cluster cores; we assume they are not lost during the gradual tidal stripping of their host clusters’ outermost regions, remaining instead at the lo-cation of final cluster disruption. The distributions of CO-containing binary systems sampled from varied CMC /EMP-Pathfinder mapping strategies are displayed in Fig. 4. We observe neg-ligible stochastic variation between samples generated using different random draws. The differences induced by distinct mapping criteria (including metallicity vs. not) are minimal, where the ‘Mass + Metal’ map yields fewer massive BH ( > 10 M⊙) binaries compared to the ‘Mass’ map by ≈ 29%. This reduction occurs because the metallicity constraint forces more binaries to be drawn from high metallicity clusters; ≈ 52% of EMP-

Pathfinder disrupted clusters have metallicities above [F e/H ] ≥ − 0.3 = 1 /2Z⊙. As a consequence, there are fewer massive BHs, which form more efficiently at low metallicity. Since these massive remnants are subject to more frequent dynamical processing, their depletion suppresses the high-eccentricity and long-period tails of the distribution. For the remainder of this work, we adopt the first random draw version of the ‘Mass + Metal Map’ as this is the more physically motivated mapping, accounting for cluster metallicity. 4.2. Binaries From Disrupted Clusters 

Here we present the intrinsic properties of the CO– luminous companion binaries that are released from 8 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al. 

disrupted dense star clusters in our hybrid CMC /EMP-

Pathfinder model. In total, approximately 4 × 10 5 COs in binaries with luminous companions were released to the field via cluster disruption. Fig. 5 shows the prop-erties of these binaries, separated by CO type. WDs are the most numerous at NWD ≈ 3 × 10 5, followed by 

NBH ≈ 1.5 × 10 5, and finally NNS ≈ 1 × 10 3. Most binaries contain a WD as a result of the initial mass function, which causes less massive objects to be more abundant. This would also cause NS binaries to be the second most common. However, in dense cluster envi-ronments, BHs dominate dynamical interactions in the cluster cores due to mass segregation. As a result, many BH–luminous star binaries can form even though BHs themselves are less common. At the same time, many NSs are ejected from their host clusters by supernova na-tal kicks. Moreover, BH burning further suppresses NS mass segregation toward the cluster core, reducing their participation in dynamical interactions that would oth-erwise form binaries. Consequently, only core-collapsed star clusters are able to efficiently form large numbers of NS binaries (Ye et al. 2019). Thus, clusters are efficient producers of binaries containing BHs and WDs. Not only are the numbers of the different CO bina-ries distinct, so are the structures of their distributions in Fig. 5. BH and NS binaries have a comparatively higher proportion of low-mass companions than WD bi-naries. As a consequence, WDs are more detectable than BHs even though they are similar in number; BH sys-tems are fainter and therefore have less precise astrom-etry (the impact on detectability is analyzed in Section 5). This disparity in companion masses is caused by the predominant dynamical formation of BH and NS binaries that sample companions from the initial mass function, which has more low-mass main-sequence stars than higher-mass stars. In contrast, ≈ 70% of the WD binaries are primordial, with their companion masses and orbital properties shaped by binary evolution in-stead. Additionally, the WD binaries peak at low ec-centricities and show more support at shorter orbital periods due to binary evolution and orbital circulariza-tion. Figure 6 more clearly illustrates the differences in the property distributions between primordial binaries and dynamically assembled binaries. Previous studies (e.g., El-Badry et al. (2024d)) have suggested that the low eccentricities of observed systems indicate a pref-erence for isolated formation channels. However, we emphasize that dynamically assembled binaries in our model, including NS and BH binaries in Fig. 5, as well as dynamically assembled WD binaries in Fig. 6, exhibit eccentricity distributions that extend to e = 0.  

> 5.

DETECTABILITY OF COMPACT OBJECT BINARIES We model the detectability of Gaia-like binaries from disrupted dense star clusters. We apply preliminary, non-stringent cuts to our dataset in Section 5.1, moti-vated by Gaia sensitivity. This process reduces the com-putational expense when running the binaries through the detailed Gaia selection pipeline to obtain orbital so-lutions, which we do in Section 5.2. 5.1. Gaia Sensitivity 

As mentioned in Section 4, we have predicted that approximately 4 × 10 5 CO–luminous companion bina-ries are released to the Galactic field from dissolved star clusters, and now we determine their detectability by considering the selection function of Gaia. Observa-tional techniques capture particular systems more reli-ably than others, which imparts a selection function that biases the binaries observed from the true astrophysical population. We model these observational effects by im-posing constraints on orbital period, distance, and ap-parent magnitude, as elaborated upon in the subsequent text. Gaia observations select for binaries with periods that are neither too short, making orbits unidentifiable via astrometry, nor too long, ensuring sufficient observa-tional cadence to detect an orbit. We truncate our dataset with upper bounds of P ≈ 4000 days for DR3 and P ≈ 7000 days for DR4 (Nagarajan et al. 2025). These limits are very inclusive; only a minority of sys-tems within this orbital range will get an orbital solu-tion. Additionally, we exclude binaries with P < 10 days to remove those too close to be detectable by astrometry (Halbwachs et al. 2023). The EMP-Pathfinder clusters have designated galactic locations (see Fig. 3); therefore, to assess the uncertain-ties associated with the observational vantage point, we randomise the position of the Sun within the Galaxy over 100 realizations. We assume the Solar galacto-centric distance is drawn from a normal distribution 

N (8 .24 , 0.2) kpc (Bobylev 2023), the azimuthal angle is drawn from a uniform distribution U (0 , 2π), and the height above the galactic disk is set to 0.028 kpc (Ben-nett & Bovy 2019). We then use the Galactocentric co-ordinates, r = ( x, y, z ), of the clusters to calculate their heliocentric distance d = |r − r⊙|. Gaia can only resolve binaries that are near the Sun, and we use the cutoffs of 

< 3 kpc for DR3, and < 10 kpc for DR4 to make cuts in our dataset. Additionally, we specify cuts based on apparent G-band magnitude, requiring mG < 21 (Gaia Collabo-ration et al. 2021). The absolute G-band magnitude, Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 9   

> Figure 6. Property distributions of primordial (solid) and dynamically-assembled (dashed) WD binaries with luminous com-panions released from disrupted clusters. Light blue indicates all of the samples from the CMC/EMP-Pathfinder model, while dark blue indicates the systems that were ‘observable’ at least once after passing through the Gaia selection function. This shows observations for DR4 over all realizations; the DR3 observations are encompassed by DR4 so not explicitly shown. The observed population selects against the low-period peak in the primordial binaries. The observations also reduce the number of binaries with low-mass companions.

MG, is obtained for each luminous companion using the 

isochrones package (Morton 2015; Montet et al. 2015). Specifically, we utilized the MIST (MESA Isochrones and Stellar Tracks) stellar evolution models (Choi et al. 2016). The package employs an interpolation scheme within the three-dimensional parameter space of mass-age-[Fe/H] to estimate stellar properties, such as MG,for values that lie between the pre-computed model grid points. For each of our binaries, we supplied their mass, age, and metallicity ([ F e/H ]) derived from the CMC simulations to interpolate for their MG.2 We also ap-ply dust extinction corrections to the magnitudes using 

MWdust , a package for 3D dust maps of the Milky Way (Bovy et al. 2016). In particular, we use the combined19 

dust maps to obtain E(B − V ) (Drimmel et al. 2003; Marshall et al. 2006; Green et al. 2019). We compute the extinction using AG = 2 .8E(B − V ), similar to the calculation in Nagarajan et al. (2025). Finally, the G-band magnitude is calculated as: 

mG = MG + 5 log 10 

 d

10pc 



+ AG (1) for which we discard any systems with mG > 21. Following these selection cuts, each remaining binary was assigned random orbital orientations (inclination i,longitude of ascending node Ω, argument of periastron 

ω) and orbital phase, Tp. We remove systems with pho-tocenter semi-major axes a0 < 0.1 mas, below which the astrometric wiggle of a binary would be too minuscule to detect (Nagarajan et al. 2025).      

> 2For about 0.1% of binaries, those with companion masses >
> 1 M ⊙,MGcannot be determined because these systems fall out-side the coverage of the interpolator grid in mass-age-[Fe/H] space.

The results of applying these initial selection cuts on our dataset are summarized in Table 1. In DR3, dis-tance accounts for the largest cuts, with ≈ 99% of bina-ries discarded on this attribute alone. The final number of binaries that pass all preliminary cuts is only 0.02% of the initial sample, a sparse 41–127 (90% credible range) binaries eligible for detection, depending on the random-ized location of the Sun). The majority of these are binaries containing WDs. In contrast, the small initial number of NS binaries is reduced down to 0-2 systems. The BH binaries also undergo a substantial reduction, down to 0-11 systems, < 0.01% of their initial number. On the other hand, the gain in observing volumes in DR4 allows 1624–2593 binaries to pass the selection cuts, expanding the eligible number of binaries by a fac-tor of ≈ 30 compared to DR3. The distance cut is no longer the bottleneck; only ≈ 33% of binaries are at dis-tances beyond the detection limit. Instead, the largest reduction of binaries in DR4 comes from astrometric precision and photometric constraints, which exclude 

≈ 94% and ≈ 87% of the initial sample, respectively. In other words, the gain in observing volume is partially counteracted by sources appearing dimmer at greater distances. WD binaries dominate the demographics, ac-counting for ≈ 96% of the final sample. BH binaries are suppressed despite comprising a significant fraction of the underlying population; > 98% are excluded by photometry alone. These BH binaries have lower mass companions than WDs, and therefore lower magnitude, making them more susceptible to magnitude truncation, as shown in Fig. 5. This further demonstrates that the observable population is a skewed representation of the inherent astrophysical distribution and the forma-tion channels and progenitor populations underlying it. 10 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al.                                                 

> CO % Excluded Period Dist. mGa0Total
> DR3 All 71 99 87 94 0.02 WD 73 99 80 92 0.03 NS 36 99 85 93 0.1 BH 68 99 98 97 >0.01 DR4 All 70 33 87 94 0.5 WD 72 31 81 92 0.8 NS 36 25 86 93 0.8 BH 66 36 98 97 0.05
> Table 1. The impact of the initial selection cuts on the sam-ple of binaries from disrupted dense star clusters. We report the median percentages after computing the eligible sample from 100 realizations of the Solar System’s position in the Galaxy. Note that the reduction in the sample by each se-lection criterion is calculated independently of the others. In DR3, the largest cuts come from the distance selection, but in DR4, the largest cuts are from the requirements for apparent magnitude and photocenter semi-major axis. These values do not reflect the final detection yields; the final counts of detected binaries are detailed in Table 2.

The binaries that pass these initial cuts are still un-likely to actually be detected. We run these eligible systems through gaiamock to fully model the Gaia se-lection function in Section 5.2. 5.2. Gaia Selection Function 

Systems that satisfy the aforementioned selection cri-teria and are eligible for detection are subsequently passed to gaiamock (El-Badry et al. 2024a), which sim-ulates the full Gaia astrometric pipeline. Gaia detects binaries by running sources through a ‘cascade’ that attempts to determine which model best explains the astrometric signal, progressing from models of lower complexity to those of higher complexity (Halbwachs et al. 2023; El-Badry 2024a; El-Badry et al. 2024b). The pipeline identifies sources that are poorly fit to the 5-parameter single star model, and progresses to a 9-parameter (variable acceleration) and 7-parameter (constant acceleration) fit. If these models fail to fit the data to a required significance, the full orbital so-lution is computed. The detections that pass through the entire cascade can be spurious, so a set of empirical quality cuts is then applied (see Section 5 and Halb-wachs et al. (2023)). We utilize the gaiamock function 

run full astrometric cascade to model the observa-tions of our eligible binaries. A binary counts as detected if it satisfies criteria for signal-to-noise ratios and orbital characterization thresholds. For both DR3 and DR4, we require the signal-to-noise ratio of the photocenter semi-major axis to comply with χa0 = a0/σ a0 > 5. In addi-tion, we require the signal-to-noise ratio of the parallax to be χϖ = ϖ/σ ϖ > 5 in DR4. To compute the se-lection functions of DR3, we require the more stringent additional criteria χϖ > 20 ,000  

> P

, as well as χa0 > 158 √P

and σecc < 0.079 ln P − 0.244. Details on the gaiamock 

pipeline and these detection criteria can be found in Halbwachs et al. (2023) and El-Badry et al. (2024a). 5.3. Detectable Binaries from Disrupted Clusters 

We overplot the detectable binaries (in both Gaia DR3 and DR4) from the CMC /EMP-Pathfinder model on top of the intrinsic binary populations in Figure 7using the selection functions discussed above, and compare these detectable binaries to the observed Gaia CO binaries. The top panels of Fig. 7 show the eccentricity vs. pe-riod parameter space for the CO-luminous companion binaries. The Gaia observations overlap with the cover-age of our model binaries. The observed WD binaries exhibit eccentricities spanning the full range from e = 0 to e ≈ 1. The periods of the detectable binaries are concentrated within the range dictated by the selection function. Most of the model BHs have periods beyond our upper limits for the Gaia detection horizon of 4000 days in DR3 ( ≈ 68%) and 7000 days in DR4 ( ≈ 66%; see Table 1). This indicates that the majority of these modeled binaries are unobservable in these data releases. Furthermore, even among the systems that pass the ini-tial cuts in Section 5.1 and are processed through the 

gaiamock pipeline, a large fraction are still excluded due to insufficient orbital coverage. Relative to the Gaia ob-servational baseline (66 months for DR4; Gaia Collabo-ration et al. 2024), the orbital coverage of BHs (median 0.3 orbits) is significantly lower than for WDs (1.1) or NSs (1.0). Correspondingly, 87% of modeled BHs fail to sample even half an orbital period, whereas only 23% of WDs and < 0.1% of NSs fall below this threshold. Thus, despite having similar intrinsic abundance to WDs, BHs are not detectable in our model due to their character-istically long orbital periods. Also shown in Fig. 7 are the CO and main sequence masses. The observed masses of the model WDs and their companions broadly cover their underlying mass ranges, although there is a higher density of observations at the lower end of the mass ranges due to the bottom-heavy nature of the initial mass function. In DR3, the number of detectable binaries originat-ing from disrupted clusters is sparse, as summarized in Table 2. We predict a mean of only 0 .3 observable WDs (90% credible range: 0–2) over 100 realizations; whereas there are nearly 3200 WD containing binaries observed so far Shahaf et al. (2024). As expected from Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 11 

Figure 7. Properties of the CMC/EMP-Pathfinder binaries. Blue shading represent WDs, orange represent NSs, and gray represents BHs. The pink stars indicate Gaia detections. We display the WD candidates as selected by Shahaf et al. (2024). Squares indicate detections over all 100 realizations; filled symbols represent DR3 and open symbols represent DR4. Note that this visualization displays a factor of 100 more detections than would be expected in any single realization, as it represents the total marginalized discovery space. The dashed (dotted) line shows the maximum period detectable in Gaia DR3 (DR4). Top: 

Eccentricity vs. period. The observable points clearly showcase the orbital period selection. Approximately 66% of BHs in the model are in systems too wide to pass our initial lenient DR3 and DR4 cuts. Middle: Luminous companion mass vs. CO mass. Our model produced a smaller proportion of massive NSs due to the adopted supernova prescription (see Section 3). Bottom: 

Period vs. CO mass. 12 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al.                  

> Release CO Mean 90% CI DR3 WD 0.33 [0, 2] NS 0.00 [0, 0] BH 0.00 [0, 0] DR4 WD 5.45 [1, 14] NS 0.02 [0, 0] BH 0.00 [0, 0]
> Table 2. Detection statistics for the CO–luminous binary populations. Values represent the number of detected sys-tems in a single realization, averaged over 100 realizations.

the initial population and observational selection cuts, the prospects for NS binaries are similarly limited. The expected yield is 0 to 90% credibility. Thus, our model suggests disrupted dense star clusters do not account for the over-representation of metal-poor halo NS binaries in Gaia DR3. Likewise, BH binaries are virtually unde-tectable with 0 detections. As evident in Table 1, the lack of detections is a consequence of most binaries from disrupted dense star clusters being too distant for DR3 sensitivity. The outlook improves slightly in the expansion to DR4. The model anticipates a mean of 5 .5 WDs (90% credible range: 1–14), representing an approximately ten-fold improvement over the DR3 prediction. The NS average also trends upward to just 0 .02; detections re-main rare events with the credible interval remaining [0,0]. This lack of significant improvement is driven by several physical bottlenecks. As shown in Table 1, the most significant constraints on BH detection in DR4 are photometry and astrometry, largely because these BHs are paired with comparatively low-mass stellar compan-ions (see Fig. 5). Furthermore, the BH population is characterized by long orbital periods (Figs. 5 and 7), the majority of which exceed the temporal baseline of Gaia observations. Consequently, the survey cannot sample enough of the orbits to produce a robust astrometric solution for the bulk of the modeled BH population. Fig. 8 shows the locations of the model binaries that were detected at least once throughout the 100 realiza-tions of our simulated observations. Most detectable binaries are located within the Solar neighbourhood, but most clusters dissolved closer to the Galactic cen-tre, too distant to be within Gaia’s detection horizon in DR3. These binaries are technically within the DR4 horizon. However, the number of additional detections is stifled by the decrease in apparent brightness inherent to sources located in the Galactic centre from increased distance and dust.    

> Figure 8. The spatial locations of our model binaries, based on the EMP-Pathfinder cluster locations in Fig. 3, in carte-sian coordinates. The binaries detected at least once across the 100 realizations are shown as blue circles.The Solar loca-tion is marked by the dashed line. The detection horizon of DR3 (top) and DR4 (bottom) is shown by the grey shaded region. The DR4 horizon fully covers the plot. 6.

DISCUSSION 6.1. Model Uncertainties 

Assumptions in modeling cluster formation and dis-ruption, as well as in stellar and binary evolution in dynamical environments, introduce uncertainties in the Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 13 predicted number and properties of CO binaries origi-nating from disrupted star clusters. A primary source of uncertainty in this analysis is the assumption that binaries remain at the cluster’s final co-ordinates at dissolution. In reality, the galactic orbits of these systems are shaped by their initial ejection veloc-ities from the host clusters, followed by further orbital migration due to secular galactic evolution and external perturbations. In addition, the time resolution of the snapshot output in EMP-Pathfinder introduces inher-ent uncertainty in the precise locations where clusters are disrupted. However, we have verified that this does not qualitatively impact our results. Within a 10 kpc radius of the Sun, the volume is large enough to include the high-density regions of the inner Galaxy. Since many clusters here reside on relatively stable orbits, the physi-cal distance they travel between time steps remains lim-ited. Conversely, the 3 kpc local radius around the Sun has a relatively lower cluster density, so many of the clusters within this volume originated from more popu-lated regions elsewhere in our model. However, because clusters are just as likely to enter the 3 kpc volume as they are to leave it between snapshots, the net num-ber of systems within this region, and thus the number of detectable binaries, is not expected to change signif-icantly. This implies that our findings of a scarcity of detectable binaries is further supported. In addition to uncertainties for cluster disruption in the Galactic environment, there are also uncertainties from assumptions of supernova physics and binary star evolution in CMC star cluster models. For example, we as-sume a supernova natal kick distribution for NSs derived from observed isolated pulsars in the Galaxy (Hobbs et al. 2005). However, more recent studies, including ones that also consider the observed populations of NSs in binary systems, suggest that the natal kick for NSs may be lower than previously thought (e.g., O’Doherty et al. 2023; Disberg & Mandel 2025). If this is the case, more NSs would be retained in dense star clusters and participate in subsequent dynamical interactions that may form Gaia-like NS binaries. We leave a detailed ex-ploration of the impacts of NS natal kicks on CO binary formation for future studies. Furthermore, the CMC catalog models adopt one set of initial binary properties (Section 3) and fix the treat-ments for all binary and stellar evolution processes, in-cluding those for mass transfer stability and common envelope evolution. It is well understood that stability in mass transfer can significantly alter the final binary orbital periods (e.g., Soberman et al. 1997), which are essential for understanding the evolution of CO binaries detected by Gaia (e.g., Rubio et al. 2025b). We have ver-ified that changing the initial binary orbital period and eccentricity distributions from a log-normal and thermal distribution, respectively, to distributions motivated by observations of Galactic O-type stars (Sana et al. 2012), does not significantly influence the number or binary properties of CO–MS binaries produced in dense star clusters. This is likely because the log-normal orbital pe-riod distribution closely resembles that inferred by Sana et al. (2012), especially at large orbital periods, while subsequent binary evolution largely erases the imprint of the initial eccentricity distribution. On the other hand, we found that mass transfer stabil-ity can significantly affect the number and binary prop-erties of Gaia-detectable CO–MS binaries originated from dense star clusters. For example, Figure 9 shows the WD–MS binaries from dense star clusters simula-tions with two different mass transfer stability crite-ria. These example simulations all have the same ini-tial conditions, with the initial number of stars N =8 × 10 5, virial radius rv = 1 pc, galactocentric distance 

rg = 8 kpc, and metallicity Z = 0 .002. All other bi-nary evolution treatments are fixed except for the mass transfer stability. The updated mass transfer prescrip-tion from Belczynski et al. (2008) allows for more sta-ble mass transfer and many more WD binaries to have wider orbital periods around 1000 days, potentially de-tectable by Gaia, while the older prescription from Hur-ley et al. (2002) and Hjellming & Webbink (1987) has fewer WD binaries at orbital periods within the Gaia detection limit. Yamaguchi et al. (2025a) studied the ef-fects of mass transfer stability in isolated binaries on the population of Gaia WD binaries and suggested that for accretor-to-donor mass ratios above ∼ 0.4, mass transfer is stable, enabling the production of wide binaries. Sim-ilarly, Rubio et al. (2025b) found that more stable mass transfer during the first ascent giant branch phase in isolated binaries is favored by APOGEE-GALEX-Gaia observations. We leave a systematic exploration of the effects of mass transfer stability in dynamical environ-ments to future work. We have verified that our results are robust to the sampling of our model binaries. Using the ‘Mass’ map introduced in Section 4.1 and Fig. 4 instead of the ‘Mass + Metal’ map between EMP-Pathfinder and CMC does not impact the results. Recall, the ‘Mass + Metal’ map reduces the number of BHs by ≈ 29%. However, imple-menting the ‘Mass’ map increased the mean number of BH detections from 0 to 0.03 in DR4, with no change in DR3. Lastly, the initial selection boundaries in Sec-tion 5.1 were chosen to be lenient; applying stricter cuts would only further diminish our already modest detec-tion yield. In contrast, extending the acceptable period 14 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al. 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5      

> Orbital Period [days]
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Normalized Count
> WD MS (t 13.8 Gyr)
> Hurley et al. (2002)
> + Hjellming & Webbink (1987)
> Belczynski et al. (2008)
> Figure 9. Orbital period distributions of model WD–MS binaries (primordial and dynamically assembled) from dense star clusters at the present day, comparing two binary mass transfer stability criteria. All other initial conditions and bi-nary evolution physics are identical across simulations. Each distribution is normalized by the total number of WD–MS binaries over two CMC runs with different random seeds. The green histogram corresponds to models using the default BSE
> prescription for mass transfer stability (Hurley et al. 2002), with asymptotic giant branch and giant branch stars treated following Hjellming & Webbink (1987). The orange his-togram shows models adopting the prescription of Belczynski et al. (2008) as an example.

range is offset by the insufficient orbital coverage avail-able for long-period systems. Similarly, expanding the distance limits is counteracted by source faintness and the associated degradation in astrometric precision for distant binaries. Because our constraints on mG and a0

are motivated by established Gaia Collaboration stan-dards, we consider these parameters fixed for the pur-pose of this analysis. 6.2. Potential Formation Pathways of Gaia Compact Object Binaries 

Since their discovery, Gaia CO binaries have been par-ticularly intriguing for studying the evolution of stellar remnants without contamination from their luminous companions. However, standard isolated binary evo-lution often struggles to reproduce these systems, due, for example, to uncertainties in common-envelope evo-lution. Alternative formation channels are proposed, in-cluding dynamical formation in star clusters of various masses (e.g., Rastello et al. 2023; Di Carlo et al. 2024; Mar´ ın Pina et al. 2024b; Tanikawa et al. 2024). The discovery of Gaia BH3 in the ED-2 stream (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2024; Balbinot et al. 2024) provides strong evidence that at least a fraction of BH–MS bi-naries in the Galaxy originate from disrupted star clus-ters. For example, Di Carlo et al. (2024) found that the dynamical formation of BH–MS binaries in open and young star clusters is more efficient at producing Gaia-like BH–star systems than isolated binary evolution, and may dominate the observable population even if only 

∼ 10% of star formation occurs in clusters. Similarly, Mar´ ın Pina et al. (2024b) and Rastello et al. (2023) also suggested high formation efficiencies of BH–MS binaries in cluster environments. In the EMP-Pathfinder /CMC 

model, we find that the total BH–MS formation effi-ciency is ∼ 3 × 10 −5 M −1 

> ⊙

, broadly consistent with the values reported in Mar´ ın Pina et al. (2024b) and Fan-toccoli et al. (2025). However, the relative formation efficiency of BH–MS binaries originating from star clusters versus isolated bi-nary evolution remains highly uncertain. Kotko et al. (2024) suggested that both channels produce Gaia-like BH binaries with comparable efficiencies, ∼ 3×10 −7 per unit stellar mass. Nagarajan et al. (2025) used gaiamock 

to forward model the Gaia selection function on binary populations in a simulated Milky Way–like galaxy with a realistic, metallicity-dependent star formation history and 3D dust map, analyzing isolated binaries and open and young star clusters separately. They found that the isolated binary evolution model of Chawla et al. (2022) predicts no BH detections in DR3, significantly underes-timating the observed Gaia BH population. In contrast, they found that the dynamical model of Di Carlo et al. (2024) overpredicts the number of BHs with DR3 orbital solutions by a factor of ∼ 8. The discrepancy between the predicted observable results of Di Carlo et al. (2024) and this study may stem from the higher formation ef-ficiency of lower-mass star clusters compared to their massive, dense counterparts. Furthermore, lower-mass, young and open clusters can dissolve closer to the So-lar neighborhood, instead of relying on tidal shocks from high-density cold clouds to disrupt the bulk of more mas-sive clusters. In addition, there is a pile-up of binaries with an orbital period of 4 × 10 3 d in Di Carlo et al. (2024) arising from their assumptions regarding binary properties, allowing for more Gaia detectable binaries. The formation efficiency of NS–MS binaries in cluster environments is significantly lower than that of BH–MS binaries. We find that the NS–MS formation efficiency from dense star clusters is ∼ 2 × 10 −7 M −1 

> ⊙

given the adopted supernova and natal kick prescriptions, which is about two orders of magnitude lower than the BH– MS formation efficiency. Consistent with this trend, Tanikawa et al. (2024) reported formation efficiencies of 

∼ 10 −6–10 −5 M −1 

> ⊙

for Gaia-like BH binaries, compared Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 15 to ≲ 10 −7 M −1 

> ⊙

for Gaia-like NS binaries in open star clusters with masses of 200–2000 M⊙.If most observed Gaia NS binaries originate from iso-lated binary evolution, the apparent overabundance of metal-poor, halo NS systems likely reflects the Galaxy’s assembly history, e.g., accretion of metal-poor dwarf galaxies, rather than dynamical formation in star cluster environments. In this scenario, a corresponding excess of metal-poor MS binaries should also be present in the halo. The absence of such a trend would instead point to alternative explanations. These might include an intrin-sically higher formation efficiency of NSs in metal-poor environments, systematically lower natal kicks for NSs, which can enhance their retention in clusters and boost the dynamical formation of NS–MS binaries, or a larger initial population of denser, more massive star clusters.  

> 7.

CONCLUSIONS In this work, we present the first study of detectable CO-luminous binaries from disrupted GC progenitors. We employ a novel methodology that couples the cos-mological formation and disruption of star clusters with resolved stellar and binary evolution from Monte Carlo 

N -body models. We use EMP-Pathfinder to simulate the properties of the Milky Way’s dense clusters from their formation to dissolution, and map these clusters by mass to CMC models for the internal stellar evolution and dynamics. Motivated by recent Gaia discoveries, we tracked the populations of luminous-CO binaries that originated within these clusters. We simulated Gaia observations of our model binaries with the gaiamock 

pipeline to test the detectability of our model binaries and determine if dense star clusters are a feasible envi-ronment of origin for the Gaia CO-containing binaries. We find that within our model: 

• Approximately 4 × 10 5 CO-luminous companion binaries are released to the Galactic field from dis-solved dense star clusters, as discussed in Section 4.2. 

• Most of the released binaries contain a WD (3 ×

10 5), followed by those with a BH (1 .5 × 10 5), and lastly a NS (1 ×10 3), as detailed in Section 4.2 and Fig. 5. 

• Despite a similar abundance to WDs, BHs are more difficult to detect because their companion mass distribution favors lower-mass stars, which are intrinsically faint. Furthermore, the character-istically longer orbital periods of BH binaries often exceed the Gaia mission baseline, preventing their orbits from being fully resolved. 

• ≈ 68% of luminous-WD binaries are primordial (Section 4.2 and Fig. 6), whereas 100% of the luminous-NS or BH binaries released from our dis-rupted dense clusters are dynamically formed. As a result, there are many more short-period, circu-lar WD binaries. 

• < 1% of clusters disrupt within the approximate Gaia DR3 detection horizon, and up to ≈ 70% dis-rupt within the approximate horizon of Gaia DR4, as reflected in Fig. 2. As such, Section 5 and Table 1 detail that the largest bottleneck to detection in DR3 is distance, and in DR4 it is astrometric and photometric precision. 

• Gaia detections are scarce for these systems, as explained in Section 5.3 and Table 2. The pre-dicted yields for Gaia DR3 are at most 2 WD and 0 NS and BH binaries (90% credibility). For DR4, the expanded volume increases these detections to a maximum of 14 WD, however the estimated detection of NSs and BHs remains at 0. While dense star clusters can explain some of Gaia’s CO– luminous binaries, not all of the observations can be accounted for by this formation channel. These results have significant implications for the in-terpretation of Gaia CO binaries. First, our model pre-dicts that disrupted dense clusters are inefficient pro-ducers of luminous-NS binaries, and consequently, we predict nearly zero detections for binaries containing NSs across all scenarios. This strongly suggests that disrupted dense clusters cannot account for the over-representation of metal-poor, halo NS binaries observed in Gaia DR3. Instead, this could reflect the Galaxy’s assembly history of low-metallicity systems during the epoch of star cluster formation, or an overestimation of supernova natal kicks in current models. Additionally, our results highlight an observational bias against dynamically formed BH–luminous compan-ion binaries. Although BH binaries make up a substan-tial fraction of the underlying population analyzed here, they remain virtually undetectable in DR3 and DR4. This suppression is driven by a high density of systems with long orbital periods (Fig. 7) and their tendency to pair with lower-mass, dimmer main-sequence compan-ions compared to WDs (Fig. 5). This indicates that the observed Gaia population may be a biased repre-sentation of the true astrophysical demographics, with a selection against wide, dynamically formed binaries containing BHs. In summary, the Gaia binary observations remain an intriguing probe of both CO formation, binary evolution 16 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al. 

processes, and the Milky Way’s history. Existing stud-ies of either isolated evolution or dynamical formation in star clusters have not fully accounted for the observed populations of WDs, NSs, and BHs in binaries with lu-minous companions. This work contributes to this effort by demonstrating that, while dense star clusters are a viable formation channel for a subset of these systems, they are insufficient to explain the full observed pop-ulation. Future data releases will continue to improve the observed dataset, providing more opportunities to constrain possible formation channels. Coupled with more detailed modeling that unifies cluster dynamics, binary evolution, and Galactic structure, these observa-tions will enable a more complete understanding of the origin and demographics of CO binaries in the Milky Way. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Katie Breivik and Maya Fishbach for help-ful discussions. A.S.Z. acknowledges the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada - Canada Graduate Scholarships - Doctoral (NSERC-CGS-D) program, Ontario Early Researcher Award Grant ER24-18-170, and NSERC grant RGPIN-2023-05511. C.S.Y. and M.R.-C. acknowledge sup-port from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re-search Council of Canada (NSERC) DIS-2022-568580, and C.S.Y. acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. M.R.-C. acknowledges funding from the Global Talent Junior Fellowship Programme at the Instituto Galego de F´ ısica de Altas Enerx´ ıas (IG-FAE), supported by grant CEX2023-001318-M (Mar´ ıa de Maeztu Unit of Excellence and Agencia Espa˜ nola de Investigaci´ on / 10.13039/501100011033). This work has received financial support from the Xunta de Galicia (CIGUS Network of Research Centres) and the Euro-pean Union through the Galicia Feder 2021-2027 Pro-gram. This research was supported in part by grant NSF PHY-2309135 to the Kavli Institute for Theoreti-cal Physics (KITP). 

# Software: CMC (Rodriguez et al. 2022), COSMIC 

(Breivik et al. 2020), isochrones (Morton 2015), 

MWdust (Bovy et al. 2016), gaiamock (El-Badry et al. 2024b), NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), pandas (McKin-ney 2010; The pandas development team 2020), Mat-plotlib (Hunter 2007), and Astropy (Astropy Collabora-tion et al. 2013, 2018, 2022) REFERENCES 

> Ambartsumian, V. A. 1938, TsAGI Uchenye Zapiski, 22, 19 Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 558, A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068 Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., et al. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 935, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74 Balbinot, E., Dodd, E., Matsuno, T., et al. 2024, A&A, 687, L3, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450425 Bashi, D., Belokurov, V., & Hodgkin, S. 2024, MNRAS, 535, 949, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2385 Baumgardt, H., & Makino, J. 2003, MNRAS, 340, 227, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06286.x Belczynski, K., Kalogera, V., Rasio, F. A., et al. 2008, ApJS, 174, 223, doi: 10.1086/521026 Bennett, M., & Bovy, J. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 1417, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2813 Bobylev, V. V. 2023, Astronomy Letters, 49, 493, doi: 10.1134/S1063773723090025 Bovy, J., Rix, H.-W., Green, G. M., Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2016, ApJ, 818, 130, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/130 Breivik, K., Coughlin, S., Zevin, M., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, 71, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9d85 Burrows, A., Wang, T., Vartanyan, D., & Coleman, M. S. B. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2311.12109, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.12109 Chawla, C., Chatterjee, S., Breivik, K., et al. 2022, ApJ, 931, 107, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac60a5 Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/102 Cournoyer-Cloutier, C., Sills, A., Harris, W. E., et al. 2024, ApJ, 977, 203, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad90b3 Di Carlo, U. N., Agrawal, P., Rodriguez, C. L., & Breivik, K. 2024, ApJ, 965, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2f2c Disberg, P., & Mandel, I. 2025, ApJL, 989, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adf286 Drimmel, R., Cabrera-Lavers, A., & L´ opez-Corredoira, M. 2003, A&A, 409, 205, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20031070 Duquennoy, A., & Mayor, M. 1991, A&A, 248, 485 El-Badry, K. 2024a, NewAR, 98, 101694, doi: 10.1016/j.newar.2024.101694

Luminous CO Binaries from Disrupted Dense Clusters 17 

—. 2024b, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 38, doi: 10.33232/001c.117652 El-Badry, K., Lam, C., Holl, B., et al. 2024a, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 100, doi: 10.33232/001c.125461 —. 2024b, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 100, doi: 10.33232/001c.125461 El-Badry, K., & Rix, H.-W. 2019, MNRAS, 482, L139, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/sly206 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., & Heintz, T. M. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 2269, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab323 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Quataert, E., et al. 2023a, MNRAS, 518, 1057, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3140 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Cendes, Y., et al. 2023b, MNRAS, 521, 4323, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad799 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Latham, D. W., et al. 2024c, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 58, doi: 10.33232/001c.121261 El-Badry, K., Simon, J. D., Reggiani, H., et al. 2024d, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 27, doi: 10.33232/001c.116675 Elmegreen, B. G. 2010, ApJL, 712, L184, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/712/2/L184 Elmegreen, B. G., & Hunter, D. A. 2010, ApJ, 712, 604, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/712/1/604 Fantoccoli, F., Barber, J., Dosopoulou, F., Chattopadhyay, D., & Antonini, F. 2025, MNRAS, 538, 243, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf303 Fryer, C. L., Belczynski, K., Wiktorowicz, G., et al. 2012, ApJ, 749, 91, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/749/1/91 Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629272 Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2021, A&A, 649, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039657 Gaia Collaboration, Panuzzo, P., Mazeh, T., et al. 2024, A&A, 686, L2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449763 Gieles, M., Portegies Zwart, S. F., Baumgardt, H., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 793, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10711.x Green, G. M., Schlafly, E., Zucker, C., Speagle, J. S., & Finkbeiner, D. 2019, ApJ, 887, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5362 Halbwachs, J.-L., Pourbaix, D., Arenou, F., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A9, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243969 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Heger, A., M¨ uller, B., & Mandel, I. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2304.09350, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.09350 Heggie, D. C. 1975, MNRAS, 173, 729, doi: 10.1093/mnras/173.3.729 H´ enon, M. 1961, Annales d’Astrophysique, 24, 369 Hjellming, M. S., & Webbink, R. F. 1987, ApJ, 318, 794, doi: 10.1086/165412 Hobbs, G., Lorimer, D. R., Lyne, A. G., & Kramer, M. 2005, MNRAS, 360, 974, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09087.x Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55 Hurley, J. R., Tout, C. A., & Pols, O. R. 2002, MNRAS, 329, 897, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.05038.x Kaib, N. A., & Raymond, S. N. 2014, ApJ, 782, 60, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/782/2/60 Kiel, P. D., Hurley, J. R., Bailes, M., & Murray, J. R. 2008, MNRAS, 388, 393, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13402.x Kotko, I., Banerjee, S., & Belczynski, K. 2024, MNRAS, 535, 3577, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2591 Kremer, K., Ye, C. S., Rui, N. Z., et al. 2020, ApJS, 247, 48, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab7919 Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04022.x Kruijssen, J. M. D. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 3008, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21923.x Kruijssen, J. M. D., Pelupessy, F. I., Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1927, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20322.x Kruijssen, J. M. D., Pelupessy, F. I., Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., Portegies Zwart, S. F., & Icke, V. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 1339, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18467.x Kruijssen, J. M. D., Pfeffer, J. L., Crain, R. A., & Bastian, N. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 3134, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz968 Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., Gieles, M., & Portegies Zwart, S. F. 2005, A&A, 429, 173, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20041476 Mar´ ın Pina, D., Rastello, S., Gieles, M., et al. 2024a, A&A, 688, L2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450460 —. 2024b, A&A, 688, L2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450460 Marshall, D. J., Robin, A. C., Reyl´ e, C., Schultheis, M., & Picaud, S. 2006, A&A, 453, 635, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20053842 McKinney, W. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, ed. S. van der Walt & J. Millman, 51–56 Miholics, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., & Sills, A. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1421, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1312 Miyaji, S., Nomoto, K., Yokoi, K., & Sugimoto, D. 1980, PASJ, 32, 303, doi: 10.1093/pasj/32.2.303 Montet, B. T., Morton, T. D., Foreman-Mackey, D., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, 25, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/809/1/25 18 Schiebelbein-Zwack et al. 

Morton, T. D. 2015, isochrones: Stellar model grid package, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1503.010 M¨ uller-Horn, J., Rix, H.-W., El-Badry, K., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2510.05982, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.05982 Nagarajan, P., El-Badry, K., Chawla, C., et al. 2025, PASP, 137, 044202, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/adc839 Nomoto, K. 1984, ApJ, 277, 791, doi: 10.1086/161749 —. 1987, ApJ, 322, 206, doi: 10.1086/165716 O’Doherty, T. N., Bahramian, A., Miller-Jones, J. C. A., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 521, 2504, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad680 Pfeffer, J., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Crain, R. A., & Bastian, N. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 4309, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3124 Rastello, S., Iorio, G., Mapelli, M., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 526, 740, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2757 Reina-Campos, M., Keller, B. W., Kruijssen, J. M. D., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 517, 3144, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1934 Rodriguez, C. L., Weatherford, N. C., Coughlin, S. C., et al. 2022, ApJS, 258, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac2edf Rubio, A. C., Breivik, K., Badenes, C., et al. 2025a, A&A, 704, A6, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555600 —. 2025b, A&A, 704, A6, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555600 Sana, H., de Mink, S. E., de Koter, A., et al. 2012, Science, 337, 444, doi: 10.1126/science.1223344 Shahaf, S., Bashi, D., Mazeh, T., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 518, 2991, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3290 Shahaf, S., Hallakoun, N., Mazeh, T., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 3729, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae773 Smith, B. D., Bryan, G. L., Glover, S. C. O., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 466, 2217, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw3291 Soberman, G. E., Phinney, E. S., & van den Heuvel, E. P. J. 1997, A&A, 327, 620, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9703016 Spitzer, Jr., L. 1940, MNRAS, 100, 396, doi: 10.1093/mnras/100.5.396 Springel, V. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 791, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15715.x Tanikawa, A., Wang, L., & Fujii, M. S. 2024, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7, 39, doi: 10.33232/001c.117684 The pandas development team. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134 Tian, H.-J., El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., & Gould, A. 2020, ApJS, 246, 4, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab54c4 Trujillo-Gomez, S., Reina-Campos, M., & Kruijssen, J. M. D. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 3972, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1932 van Son, L. A. C., Roy, S. K., Mandel, I., et al. 2025, ApJ, 979, 209, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ada14a Yamaguchi, N., El-Badry, K., Rees, N. R., et al. 2024, PASP, 136, 084202, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ad6809 Yamaguchi, N., El-Badry, K., & Shahaf, S. 2025a, PASP, 137, 104205, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ae0d30 —. 2025b, PASP, 137, 104205, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ae0d30 Ye, C. S., Kremer, K., Chatterjee, S., Rodriguez, C. L., & Rasio, F. A. 2019, ApJ, 877, 122, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1b21