Title: Generalist Vision-Language Models for Fast Radio Burst detection: a zero-shot benchmark against a specialized detector

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07382v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:53:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Generalist Vision-Language Models for Fast Radio Burst detection: a zero-shot benchmark against a specialized detector 

Raiff H. Santos ,∗ Amilcar R. Queiroz ,† K. E. L. de Farias ,‡ and Rafael A. Batista §

Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, R. Apr´ ıgio Veloso 882, Bairro Universit´ ario, 58429-900, Campina Grande, PB, Brazil 

Tharcisyo S. S. Duarte ¶

Instituto de Forma¸ c˜ ao de Educadores, Universidade Federal do Cariri, Rua Oleg´ ario Em´ ıdio de Ara´ ujo, s/n, Aldeota, 63260-000, Brejo Santo, CE, Brazil and Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, R. Apr´ ıgio Veloso 882, Bairro Universit´ ario, 58429-900, Campina Grande, PB, Brazil 

(Dated: July 9, 2026) Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) are millisecond-duration radio transients whose automated detection increasingly relies on highly specialized deep learning models. These detectors achieve exceptional performance, but they require large task-specific training datasets and cannot be redefined without retraining. In this work, we evaluate whether small, open-weight, locally run generalist Vision-Language Models (VLMs) can detect FRBs in dynamic spectra under a zero-shot, prompt-only regime, with no fine-tuning and no labeled examples, returning structured decisions with a natural-language justification. From a controlled set of 3000 simulated L-band dynamic spectra contain-ing FRBs, structured Radio Frequency Interference (RFI), and noise, we draw a balanced binary benchmark of 2000 samples and compare two such VLMs (Gemma 4 2B and 4B), sample by sample, against the state-of-the-art specialized detector SwinYNet. At the default threshold, Gemma 4 2B reaches an accuracy of 93.65%, with no statistically significant difference from SwinYNet (92.90%), while showing a significantly lower false-positive rate on structured RFI (6.4% vs. 25.0%) and no false positives on pure noise. SwinYNet retains a perfect probabilistic ranking on this benchmark (ROC-AUC of 1.0000 vs. 0.9482), a ceiling that the zero-shot VLM approaches from general-purpose pretraining alone. Rewriting the prompt alone reconfigures the same models for three-class FRB/R-FI/noise classification on the full set of 3000 spectra, where they reach up to 86% accuracy without a single false FRB. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) are intense radio transients with durations of only a few milliseconds and predom-inantly of extragalactic origin. Since the discovery of the first FRB by [1], these events have become one of the most intriguing topics in modern astrophysics and cosmology [2–7]. FRBs are characterized by their large dispersion measures (DMs) [3, 8, 9], which generally ex-ceed the expected contribution from the Milky Way, in-dicating propagation through the ionized intergalactic medium (IGM). Over the past years, hundreds of FRBs have been detected by several radio observatories, in-cluding the Parkes telescope, CHIME [10], ASKAP [11], FAST [12], and MeerKAT [13], revealing a diverse popu-lation of repeating and apparently non-repeating sources. Because of their extragalactic characteristics, they have recently been used for cosmological probes in several sce-narios [14–20].      

> ∗raiffhugos@gmail.com
> †amilcarq@df.ufcg.edu.br
> ‡klecio.lima@uaf.ufcg.edu.br
> §rafael.batista@uaf.ufcg.edu.br
> ¶tharcisyo.duarte@ufca.edu.br

Processing these streams in real-time requires auto-mated detection pipelines. Traditional pipelines rely on matched filtering and dedispersion, which are compu-tationally expensive [6, 21–23]. Historically, this pro-cess was dominated by CPU-based software packages like PRESTO (PulsaR Exploration and Search TOolkit) [24, 25], which established the foundational algorithms for in-coherent dedispersion [26] and candidate folding [27]. To cope with the escalating data rates of modern radio tele-scopes, the field transitioned toward GPU-accelerated ar-chitectures, such as the Heimdall pipeline [26], which en-abled high-throughput single-pulse searches in real-time. More recently, the paradigm has shifted toward mitigat-ing the computational burden of brute-force dedispersion altogether by introducing visual and morphological fea-ture extraction [28]. A key example is RaSPDAM (Radio Single-Pulse Detection Algorithm Based on Visual Mor-phological Features) [29], an AI-driven framework that treats the dynamic spectrum as a computer vision prob-lem to rapidly identify transient candidates. Extend-ing this visual approach to its current state-of-the-art, advanced Vision Transformer (ViT) architectures [30] have established a powerful new paradigm for end-to-end processing. Specifically, models like SwinYNet [31] represent a major shift in FRB search by performing multi-task learning that simultaneously combines real-arXiv:2607.07382v1 [cs.LG] 8 Jul 2026 2time burst detection, pixel-level signal segmentation, and direct parameter estimation from raw dynamic spectra without any prior dedispersion. While these specialized deep learning models achieve exceptional performance, they traditionally rely on large, specialized astronomi-cal datasets for training. As an alternative to training such dedicated models from scratch, the rapid advance-ment of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [32], or Vision-Language Models (VLMs), has introduced a parallel paradigm where generalist foundation models can be applied directly to visual classification tasks using only natural language prompts. This paradigm has already begun to be explored in as-tronomical problems, including galaxy morphology clas-sification [33, 34] and domain-adapted astronomical as-sistants [35, 36]. In optical transients, it was shown in Ref. [37] that a generalist Large Language Model (LLM), Google’s Gemini [38], can approach the performance of a convolutional neural network in classifying real sources versus artifacts ( real versus bogus ) across three surveys (Pan-STARRS, MeerLICHT, and ATLAS) with the ad-vantage of generating human-readable descriptions for each candidate from a few examples and concise instruc-tions. That same work, however, points to an important practical limitation. Employing a large LLM through a commercial API is, at present, infeasible at the scale of upcoming surveys (such as the Vera Rubin Observatory, which is expected to generate on the order of 10 mil-lion alerts per night), both because of token-generation latency and prohibitive costs. The authors indicate as promising directions the fine-tuning of smaller open-source LLMs, with one to two billion parameters, and model quantization to enable faster local inference. It is precisely in this direction that models such as Gemma 4 have advanced, providing open, small, locally executable VLMs [39], the central premise of the approach we adopt here. Applications to radio data have also begun to ap-pear, although still relying on fine-tuning and outside the domain of FRBs. In Ref. [40], STARWHISPER-PULSAR was proposed, which fine-tunes an MLLM over visual, textual, and numerical modalities to distin-guish pulsar candidates from noise, outperforming spe-cialized machine-learning methods. In Ref. [41], the Ra-dioAstroVQA set was built and MLLMs were fine-tuned for image classification and visual question answering (VQA) in radio astronomy, achieving accuracy compa-rable to or higher than that of existing deep-learning models. Similarly, in Ref. [42], a VLM, radio-llava, was fine-tuned for the analysis and classification of radio-astronomical sources. On the other hand, in Ref. [43], the authors evaluated generalist VLMs (Qwen and Gem-ini) on the morphological classification of radio galaxies (MiraBest FR-I/FR-II). Prompt-only strategies already achieve good performance, but the outputs are unstable, varying strongly with superficial changes to the prompt, while a light fine-tuning (LoRA) rivals specialized mod-els. Taken together, these works confirm the potential of MLLMs and VLMs in astronomy, but they typically resort to fine-tuning, to large models accessed through an API, or to tasks distinct from FRB detection. In this paper, in contrast, we present a systematic eval-uation of small, local VLMs (Gemma 4 2B and 4B) ap-plied to the task of FRB detection. We construct a con-trolled, simulated benchmark of 3000 L-band dynamic spectra, from which we draw a balanced binary subset of 2000 samples, using simulateSearch [44] containing FRB signals, various classes of structured Radio Fre-quency Interference (RFI), and background noise. We compare the zero-shot, prompt-only performance of these VLMs against SwinYNet, a state-of-the-art specialized deep learning detector. We analyze their performance across binary and multiclass tasks, evaluate their behav-ior as probabilistic classifiers, characterize their failure modes on faint signals, and discuss the computational trade-offs of deploying generalist models in operational astronomical pipelines. This paper is structured as follows. Section II reviews the physics of Fast Radio Bursts and their dispersive sig-nature, the RFI and noise that contaminate the search, and the traditional single-pulse pipelines used to detect them. Section III introduces multimodal models and the class of VLMs evaluated in this work. Section IV details the simulation setup and benchmark dataset. Section V describes the zero-shot VLM classification protocol and prompt design. Section VI presents the quantitative re-sults, paired comparison with SwinYNet, and error anal-yses. Finally, Section VII summarizes our findings and outlines directions for future work.  

> II. FAST RADIO BURSTS, RFI, AND TRADITIONAL SEARCHES

This section provides the physical and operational background for the classification task studied in this work. The goal is not a complete review of FRB as-trophysics or of transient-search software, but a concise account of three points on which the rest of the paper depends: what an FRB looks like in a dynamic spec-trum, what the two contaminants a search must reject, viz. RFI and noise, look like in the same representa-tion, and how a traditional pipeline turns a raw data stream into candidates. The detection task is fundamen-tally binary: an FRB must be separated from everything that is not an FRB, whether structured interference or background noise. This is the decision that both the spe-cialized detector and the generalist VLM perform in our comparison. The VLM, however, is not restricted to this binary decision. It can also be prompted to go beyond it and separate RFI from noise as well, a possibility we return to later in Sect. V G. 3 

> A. The dispersed burst and its visual signature

A Fast Radio Burst is a radio transient of millisecond duration, high energy, and predominantly extragalactic origin [1], although a bright radio burst from the Galactic magnetar SGR 1935+2154 has tied at least some FRBs to magnetars [45]. As the broadband pulse propagates through the ionized plasma of the interstellar and in-tergalactic media, its lower frequencies are progressively delayed relative to the higher ones, an effect known as dis-persion [27]. The resulting delay between two frequencies 

νlo and νhi is set by the DM through ∆t = e2

2πm ec

 ν−2lo − ν−2hi 

 DM , (1) and DM = 

Z d

> 0

ne(l) dl, (2) where ne(l) is the free-electron density along the path. The observed DM combines contributions from the Milky Way, the intergalactic medium, and the host galaxy [46]: DM obs (z) = DM MW + DM IGM + DM host 

1 + z . (3) A DM in excess of the expected Galactic contribu-tion [47, 48] is one of the primary indicators of an ex-tragalactic source. Other propagation effects (scatter-ing, scintillation, Faraday rotation, and plasma lensing, among others) further modify the pulse, but dispersion is the effect that dominates its appearance and underlies its detection. Because the delay scales as ν−2, an FRB traces a characteristic curved track in the dynamic spectrum, the time–frequency plane in which the horizontal axis is time, the vertical axis is frequency, and the pixel intensity is signal power. Lower frequencies arrive systematically later, so the burst appears as a single, localized, plausibly broadband sweep whose curvature is set by the DM. This quadratic sweep is the visual signature a search must re-cover, and it is exactly the morphology the VLM is asked to identify from the image alone (Sect. V). Dispersion is also what most cleanly separates an astrophysical burst from terrestrial interference, since the latter does not, in general, follow the same frequency-dependent delay [49].  

> B. Radio-frequency interference and noise

The negative class of an FRB search is dominated by two very different phenomena: RFI and system noise. RFI is contamination of terrestrial or instrumental origin like, for instance, mobile networks, wireless links, radar, satellites, power lines, and the receiver electronics them-selves. Because these sources sit far closer to the tele-scope than any astrophysical emitter, RFI is frequently orders of magnitude stronger than the signal of interest and can bury a genuine burst [49]. Crucially, RFI is not a single visual class. It appears as persistent narrowband bands (nearly horizontal lines at fixed frequencies), as broadband impulses with no dis-persive delay (nearly vertical, zero-DM structures), as periodic or repetitive patterns, and as multiband or in-band occupancy from services such as wireless networks and satellites. What these morphologies share is the ab-sence of the coherent ν−2 sweep of a dispersed burst. This makes them dangerous since some of them can par-tially imitate coherent structure and then survive as false candidates. System noise, by contrast, is the stochastic fluctuation of the instrument, with no coherent struc-ture. It matters because dispersion spreads the burst energy over a wide time span and lowers its signal-to-noise ratio, letting faint bursts sink into the background. These two contaminants map directly onto the RFI and 

NOISE classes of our benchmark (Sect. IV), whose dis-tinct behavior is what motivates reporting false positives separately for each (Sect. VI D).  

> C. Traditional single-pulse searches

Because the DM of a candidate is not known in ad-vance, a traditional single-pulse search cannot look for the sweep directly; it must reconstruct the burst by test-ing many trial DMs [29, 49]. After the strongest inter-ference is flagged and masked in time and frequency, the search proceeds by dedispersion. For a given trial DM, each frequency channel is shifted back in time by the de-lay that this DM predicts, and the channels are summed into a single time series. When the trial DM matches the burst, the curved sweep re-aligns and the burst en-ergy piles up into one narrow, high signal-to-noise (S/N) spike; when it does not, the channels add out of step and the energy smears back into the background. The two-dimensional search for a curved track is thereby re-duced to a one-dimensional search for a peak, repeated over a dense grid of trial DMs. A genuine burst reaches its maximum S/N at its true DM and falls off on either side, whereas terrestrial interference, having no disper-sive delay, peaks at zero DM; the trial DM that maxi-mizes the response therefore both estimates the disper-sion and helps distinguish the burst from RFI. Each dedispersed time series must still be searched for a pulse of unknown duration. This is done by matched filtering. The series is correlated with boxcar templates of increasing width, and the S/N is largest when the template width matches the true burst width, since a narrower window discards signal while a wider one adds noise. Samples exceeding an S/N threshold, over the joint space of trial DM, arrival time, and boxcar width, are re-tained as single-pulse candidates. Because a real event produces detections at many neighboring trials, these are then clustered to collapse each event into a single can-didate, which is finally labeled as astrophysical or as a 4false positive (historically by human inspection, and in-creasingly by machine-learning classifiers). This scheme underlies the standard search tools, from the CPU-based PRESTO [24, 25] to the GPU-accelerated Heimdall [26], and it remains the dominant approach to FRB detection. The cost of this procedure is dominated by dedis-persion. Direct incoherent dedispersion scales as 

O(Nt Nν NDM ) in the number of time samples Nt, fre-quency channels Nν , and trial DMs NDM ; with hundreds to thousands of DM trials at high time and frequency resolution, a brute-force real-time search becomes very expensive [26]. This burden has driven both the move to GPU acceleration and, more recently, a shift toward treating the dynamic spectrum as an image and apply-ing computer-vision models to it directly, as in RaSP-DAM [29], DRAFTS [49], and SwinYNet [31].  

> D. Limitations of the traditional approach

Beyond raw computational cost, the traditional pipeline has well-known operational limitations. The DM grid is redundant, so a single event is detected at many trial DMs and inflates the candidate list with duplicates. The output is dominated by false positives, most of them driven by RFI that survives the masking stage or is even introduced by it [49]. Performance is highly sensitive to parameter choices, like the RFI-flagging algorithm, the spacing of the DM grid, the set of boxcar widths, and the S/N threshold, so that faint bursts near the de-tection limit are easily lost. And because the surviving candidates must still be separated from residual interfer-ence, the pipeline ultimately relies on human verification, which becomes the practical bottleneck as data volumes grow [31]. These limitations frame the rest of the paper. The RFI-driven false-positive rate and the human-inspection bottleneck are exactly the pressure points that learning-based methods try to relieve, and the fact that the FRB signature is, at bottom, a visual pattern in the dynamic spectrum is what makes an image-level approach nat-ural. It is against this backdrop that we ask a nar-rower question: how much of that recognition is already within reach of a generalist VLM applied to the dynamic-spectrum image, with no domain-specific training at all.  

> III. MULTIMODAL MODELS AND VLMS

This section characterizes the model class evaluated in this work and the operational regime adopted. The goal is not an exhaustive review of multimodal machine learn-ing, but a concise account of how a generalist VLM, with no FRB-specific training, can be applied to dynamic-spectrum images, and how its performance should be interpreted as a lower bound on the potential of the ap-proach.  

> A. From language models to Vision-Language Models

MLLMs extend LLMs to non-textual inputs [32]. An LLM represents text as a sequence of tokens , discrete units (typically subwords) that the model reads and gen-erates. VLMs are the subclass that jointly conditions on an image I and a textual instruction p to produce a textual response y. In the dominant connector architec-ture [50], a vision encoder Ev maps the image to visual tokens, a projector Wv aligns them with the LLM em-bedding space, and an autoregressive decoder generates the answer: 

z = Wv Ev (I), p(y | I, p) = 

> T

Y

> t=1

p(yt | y<t , z, p) . (4) Here, z are the visual tokens already projected into the embedding space, and the response is generated token by token in an autoregressive way. Each token yt is produced conditioned on the previous tokens y<t , the visual tokens 

z, and the prompt p, over the T tokens of the response. Because the output is free text, the same structure can perform captioning, visual question answering, or, as in this work, systematic classification, depending solely on the prompt. This generality, that is, a single model serving dis-tinct tasks according to the instruction, comes from the pretraining regime. These models are trained on large collections of general-domain text and image-text pairs, which gives them broad visual and linguistic knowledge but does not specialize them in any particular scientific task. Throughout the paper, following the introduction, we use VLM for this class of models applied to dynamic-spectrum images. The extent to which this general com-petence transfers to specialized scientific imagery is an open question, now actively probed by dedicated multi-modal benchmarks in astronomy [51–53].  

> B. Zero-shot classification and the prompt-only regime

In this work, the VLMs operate in a zero-shot, prompt-only regime. Zero-shot means that the model classifies each spectrum without having been exposed to any la-beled example of the task, relying solely on the represen-tations acquired during general multimodal pretraining and on a textual instruction that specifies the candidate classes. This use of natural language to reference visual concepts learned in pretraining, rather than a classifier head fitted to task-specific labels, is precisely the transfer mechanism introduced by CLIP [54], here applied to dy-namic spectra. Prompt-only means that no model weight is updated. The task is defined entirely in natural lan-guage. This regime is therefore distinct from in-context (few-shot) learning, in which a handful of labeled examples 5would be embedded in the prompt as demonstrations, a strategy adopted, for instance, in the classification of optical transients with LLMs [37] and of radio galaxies with VLMs [43]. It is equally distinct from the other common strategies for adapting foundation models. There is no fine-tuning, i.e., no weight adjustment on FRB data; no retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), in which external docu-ments would be injected into the prompt; and no agentic behavior or external tool calls. The model receives a single image and a single instruction, and returns a de-cision. This choice is deliberate, as it isolates the ques-tion of interest: how much of the ability to recognize an FRB is already latent in a generalist model, prior to any domain specialization? Accordingly, the performance re-ported here should be interpreted as a measure of po-tential, not as the ceiling the approach would reach with further adaptation.  

> C. Generalist and specialized detectors

The central difference between a generalist VLM and a detector such as SwinYNet lies in the origin of its compe-tence. SwinYNet is a supervised model built on the Swin Transformer backbone [55], trained end to end on FRB data to jointly perform detection, segmentation, and pa-rameter estimation, and it operates on the PSRFITS files in its native domain. Formally, both approaches can be written as a composition of a visual feature extractor fθ

and a task head gϕ,ˆy = gϕ

 fθ (x), (5) but they differ in how the parameters ( θ, ϕ ) are ob-tained. In the specialized detector, both θ and ϕ are optimized on labeled FRB data, (θ⋆, ϕ ⋆) = arg min 

> θ,ϕ

LFRB . (6) In the zero-shot VLM, θ is fixed from general mul-timodal pretraining and the task head is induced by the textual prompt P rather than fitted, so that ˆ y =

gP

 fθ (x) with θ unchanged. Applying the VLM to FRB detection is therefore a test of visual transfer: checking whether a feature map 

fθ learned in a general domain, encoding edges, elongated tracks, textures, and localized structures, is already ex-pressive enough to separate a dispersed burst from inter-ference and from noise, without any update to θ. This is the same hierarchical, multiscale feature reuse that makes the Swin backbone an effective general-purpose vision model [55], here probed in the opposite regime, reused as-is, instead of fine-tuned. This asymmetry is part of the study design and is examined in detail in the methodological comparison (Sect. V H). It favors the specialized detector in terms of access to information, which is precisely what makes strong VLM performance interesting. The argument of the paper is not that the VLM replaces a dedicated de-tector, but that a generalist tool already recognizes the relevant patterns starting from almost no domain infor-mation, supporting the potential thesis.  

> D. Small, local, and open models

A deliberate aspect of the study is the use of small, open-weight models that run locally, rather than large models accessed through a commercial API or the large, domain-specific foundation models now being trained for astronomy [56]. This choice is enabled by a recent gen-eration of compact open models, such as the Gemma family [57], which are explicitly designed to be deploy-able across hardware ranging from consumer devices to servers, bringing state-of-the-art capability within reach of modest infrastructure. The motivations are practical. Local execution re-moves the dependence on commercial services and per-call costs; it favors reproducibility, since a specific model version can be pinned and rerun; it keeps the data un-der the control of whoever performs the analysis; and it makes the approach accessible to groups without large computational infrastructure. Small models also bring the experiment closer to a realistic deployment scenario in radio astronomy, where candidate screening may need to happen near the instrument and under hardware con-straints. The cost of this choice is a per-model capability lower than that of the largest available systems. We argue that this works in favor of the analysis rather than against it. The performance reported here is therefore a conservative floor for what the class of generalist VLMs could reach, since a larger model operating in the same prompt-only regime would be expected to match or exceed it. The two concrete models evaluated, their versions, and the hardware used are described in Sect. V B.  

> E. Structured output and interpretability

Because they produce text, VLMs can be instructed to respond in a structured format and, at the same time, to justify the decision in natural language. In this work, the model returns a label, a continuous probability that the image contains an FRB, a confidence, and a short justification accompanied by visual attributes, with the exact schema shown in Listing 1. This property is attrac-tive for scientific use, because each decision comes with an inspectable explanation, something that specialized detectors rarely offer. Even so, this justification should be treated as au-ditable auxiliary data, not as automatic physical proof. 6A model can produce a plausible explanation for an incor-rect decision. Therefore, interpretability here is under-stood as inspectability of the decision, not as a guarantee of physical causality, a point taken up again among the threats to validity (Sect. VI H).  

> IV. SIMULATION AND DATASET

This section describes the experimental design used to build the set of dynamic spectra evaluated in this work. The goal is not to reproduce the full complex-ity surrounding real observations. The idea is to create a controlled, balanced, and reproducible benchmark to compare generalist VLMs with a specialized detector on the same samples. For this reason, the instrumental con-figuration was chosen to approximate the conditions used in the evaluation of SwinYNet, making the comparison more informative without presenting the set as a real observational validation. An overview of the complete pipeline, from simulation to the paired comparison of re-sults, is shown in Fig. 1.  

> A. Motivation for using simulated data

The use of synthetic data is a deliberate methodolog-ical choice in this first experiment. In real observational data, labels can be ambiguous, incomplete, or dependent on later decisions of human inspection. In a study that seeks to measure whether a generalist VLM recognizes visual patterns associated with FRBs, RFI, and noise, this ambiguity would make it difficult to separate model error from uncertainty in the label itself. With simulation, each sample has a known ground truth. For the FRB examples, the physical parameters of the injected event are recorded in the metadata, in-cluding arrival time, DM, width, flux density, reference frequency, and profile type. For the RFI examples, the interference category and the parameters used in the gen-eration are also preserved. For noise, the sample is de-fined as the absence of an injected coherent structure, containing only system noise. Simulation also makes it possible to control the sta-tistical composition of the benchmark. The benchmark for the binary task was built in a balanced way, contain-ing the same number of FRB and NON FRB samples. This prevents the initial metrics from being dominated by an arbitrary class prevalence and makes the comparison be-tween the VLM and the specialized detector more direct. The real prevalence of FRBs in astronomical surveys is much lower, but the goal of this stage is to evaluate the discriminative capability in a controlled environment. Another important advantage is reproducibility. The pipeline uses a global seed and per-sample derived seeds. The same set can therefore be regenerated by other re-searchers as long as they use the same configuration, the same code version, and an equivalent environment for simulateSearch. This property is especially relevant be-cause the article compares models sample by sample, not only by aggregate metrics.  

> B. Generation of the PSRFITS files

The data were generated with simulateSearch [44, 58], a package for simulating high time-resolution radio ob-servations. The software allows one to compose system noise, dispersed transient signals, and different forms of RFI, producing files in search-mode PSRFITS for-mat [59]. These files can be processed by conventional astronomical tools and, in this work, also serve as the source for the dynamic-spectrum images supplied to the VLMs. Each simulated file corresponds to 2 s of observation. The configuration used has 2048 frequency channels, a time sampling of 1 .96608 × 10 −4 s, and 8-bit quantiza-tion. In practice, each sample contains approximately 10 173 time samples. The system noise level was varied reproducibly per sample through a dimensionless scale applied to the 25 K base Tsys , yielding an effective system temperature between 16.25 K and 36.25 K and prevent-ing the global noise level from being a fixed class cue. Table I summarizes the main instrumental parameters used in the generation.  

> C. Benchmark composition

The simulation produced a full set of 3000 samples, with 1000 examples of each source class ( FRB , RFI , and 

NOISE ). The benchmark used in the binary evaluation is a balanced subset of 2000 of these samples, summarized in Table II. The positive class is composed of the 1000 

FRB examples. The negative class NON FRB contains 1000 examples, split equally between 500 RFI examples and 500 NOISE examples. The remaining 500 RFI and 500 

NOISE samples are not discarded; the full set of 3000 is used in the multiclass task (Sect. VI G). The original labels are preserved in the metadata to allow diagnostic analyses, but the main task of the article aggregates RFI 

and NOISE into NON FRB , since this is the most direct formulation for comparison with a binary FRB detector. This separation between the binary label and the source class is important for interpreting the results. Two samples incorrectly classified as FRB may have very dif-ferent physical or instrumental causes. One may be rare stochastic noise, while another may be structured RFI. Preserving the source class makes it possible to estimate false-positive rates separately for RFI and noise, which became one of the central analyses of the article. 7

Configuration — simulateSearch, global seed 42, L band 1000–1500 MHz, 2048 channels, 8 bit 

Simulation → PSRFITS + labels.jsonl 

3000 samples simulated, 1000 per class binary benchmark: balanced subset of 2000 — 1000 FRB | 500 RFI (5 subtypes) | 500 NOISE 

Dynamic-spectrum imaging — per-centile norm., viridis , 1024 × 768 anonymized PNGs ( sample NNNNNN )+ image manifest.jsonl 

Generalist VLM (zero-shot, prompt-only) Gemma 4 2B / 4B, greedy decoding 

→ structured JSON, frb probability 

Specialized baseline (SwinYNet) dedicated FRB detector, operates on FITS 

→ continuous FRB score 

Paired evaluation by sample id 

accuracy / macro-F1 • ROC-AUC / AP • Mc-Nemar • false positives by RFI / NOISE 

Results — metric tables, ROC curves, score histograms 

> PSRFITS
> PSRFITS
> PNG + prompt
> threshold 0.5
> threshold 0.5

FIG. 1. Overview of the end-to-end pipeline, from simulation to results. A controlled set of 3000 dynamic spectra (1000 per source class) is simulated with simulateSearch, producing native PSRFITS files; the binary benchmark shown here is a balanced subset of 2000 samples (1000 FRB , 500 RFI across five subtypes, and 500 NOISE ). These PSRFITS then feed two independent detectors through different paths. For the generalist VLM (Gemma 4 2B/4B) they are first rendered as anonymized PNG images, which the model classifies from the image and a fixed prompt alone, whereas the specialized baseline SwinYNet operates directly on the native PSRFITS. Each produces a continuous FRB score thresholded at 0.5, and the two are then compared sample by sample through the shared sample id . The deliberate input asymmetry, a rendered image for the VLM versus the native FITS for SwinYNet, is part of the experimental design. 

D. Parameters of the simulated FRBs 

For the FRB class, each sample receives a dispersed burst with reproducibly drawn parameters. In the meta-data of the current set, the DM ranges from approx-imately 120.70 to 899.14 pc cm −3, the temporal width ranges from 0.003 to 0.005 s, and the flux density ranges from approximately 4.02 to 11.98 in the internal units used by the simulation. The arrival time, the reference frequency, the dispersion index, and the profile type also vary. These variations are relevant because they prevent the VLM from memorizing a single FRB morphology. In-stead, the model must recognize a family of visual pat-terns associated with dispersed transients, such as tem-poral localization, broadband structure, and a systematic delay with frequency. Since the study does not estimate the DM directly, it enters here as a generation parame-ter and as a diagnostic variable for future work, not as a prediction target in this first article. 8                                      

> TABLE I. Main instrumental parameters used in the generation of the simulated files. Parameter Value Instrumental reference aligned to SwinYNet domain Start frequency 1000 MHz End frequency 1500 MHz Number of channels 2048 Time sampling 1.96608 ×10 −4sDuration per file 2 s Time samples per file ≈10 173 Quantization 8 bits Gain 0.7 Base system temperature 25 K
> Tsys scale per sample (dimensionless) 0.650187 to 1.449952 Effective system temperature 16.25 K to 36.25 K Maximum FRB width 0.005 s Global seed 42 TABLE II. Composition and class mapping of the binary benchmark dataset. The 2000 total samples are evenly dis-tributed between the target class ( FRB ) and the negative class (NON FRB ), which combines structured interference ( RFI ) and background NOISE .Source class Binary label Number of samples
> FRB FRB 1000
> RFI NON FRB 500
> NOISE NON FRB 500
> Total 2000
> TABLE III. Distribution of the 500 RFI samples of the binary benchmark across distinct interference categories. The bench-mark includes five balanced categories (100 samples each) rep-resenting common environmental and anthropogenic interfer-ence types, ranging from continuous narrow-band signals to transient broad-band events. RFI category Number of samples
> persistent narrowband 100
> impulsive broadband 100
> wifi multiband 100
> point to point microwave 100
> satellite like inband 100
> E. RFI and noise

The RFI examples were simulated to represent struc-tured interference capable of confusing an automatic transient search. The full simulated set contains five cat-egories, balanced with 200 samples each, of which 100 per category enter the binary benchmark (Table III). These categories cover both persistent contamination in frequency and impulsive or multiband events. This diversity is important because RFI is not a single vi-sual class. Some samples may appear as persistent hor-izontal lines, others as broadband impulses, multiband structures, or patterns that occupy specific regions of the band. A useful classifier must separate these morpholo-gies from a dispersed track compatible with an FRB. The NOISE examples, in turn, represent samples with-out an injected coherent structure. They are important to test whether the model confuses random fluctuations with FRB candidates. The reproducible variation in the system noise level is applied to all classes, including FRB, RFI, and NOISE, to reduce the risk that the classifier uses only the global brightness or the mean contrast as a decision cue.  

> F. Conversion to dynamic-spectrum images

After the PSRFITS were generated, each file was con-verted into a PNG dynamic-spectrum image. In these images, the horizontal axis represents time, the vertical axis represents frequency, and the pixel intensity repre-sents signal power. This representation was chosen be-cause it corresponds to the type of visual input that a VLM can process directly. One representative example of each class is shown in Fig. 2. In the experimental run described here, the images were generated with percentile normalization, in which the pixel intensities are linearly scaled between the 1st and 99th percentiles of each dynamic spectrum and clipped to this range, with the viridis colormap, awidth of 1024 pixels, and a height of 768 pixels. These parameters were recorded in the image manifest to keep the evaluation auditable. The choice of normalization and colormap can influence the performance of visual models; for this reason, it must be treated as part of the experimental protocol, not as a purely aesthetic detail. The VLM receives only the final image and the textual classification instruction. It does not receive the FITS file, the simulation parameters, the DM, the true label, or any numerical metadata. This choice creates an im-portant difference relative to SwinYNet, which operates on FITS files and can exploit a specialized pipeline. The comparison is therefore deliberately asymmetric. The 9FRB RFI (impulsive broadband) NOISE         

> FIG. 2. Representative anonymized dynamic-spectrum images, one per class, as supplied to the VLM. Left: an FRB (a single dispersed broadband transient); middle: RFI of the impulsive broadband type (broadband impulses localized in time); right:
> NOISE (system noise only). In each panel the horizontal axis is time, the vertical axis is frequency, and the pixel intensity is signal power ( viridis colormap, percentile normalization).

specialized detector receives an input closer to its nat-ural domain, while the VLM operates on a single visual representation.  

> G. Anonymization and leakage control

A central methodological point is to prevent label leak-age. If the file name, the directory, or the image ti-tle contained terms such as FRB , RFI , or NOISE , a VLM could exploit that textual cue instead of analyzing the dynamic spectrum. To avoid this, the images supplied to the model were saved in a neutral directory, with anonymous names in the format sample 000000.png ,

sample 000001.png , and so on. The image manifest preserves the link between the anonymous identifier, the source FITS, the simulation parameters, and the true label. This manifest is used only by the evaluation pipeline. The anonymous image path is the only path needed for VLM inference, and the images have no title with class information. In this way, the prediction must depend on the visual content of the dynamic spectrum. This leakage control is also important for external com-parison. The files and manifests make it possible to align predictions by sample id without exposing the source class to the classifier. The aggregate metrics and the paired comparison can thus be computed later without contaminating the classification stage.  

> H. Reproducibility and generated artifacts

The pipeline design explicitly separates data, images, predictions, and metrics. The simulation generates the PSRFITS files and the label metadata; the plotting stage generates the anonymized images and the visual manifest; the classification produces per-sample predic-tions; and the evaluation computes aggregate metrics and paired analyses. This separation makes it possible to re-peat a single stage, audit inputs and outputs, and com-pare different models on exactly the same samples. The main artifacts used in this stage are: 

• dataset/fits/ : simulated PSRFITS files; 

• dataset/images/samples/ : anonymized images supplied to the VLM; 

• dataset/metadata/labels.jsonl : labels and simulation parameters; 

• dataset/metadata/image manifest.jsonl : link between the anonymous image, the source FITS, and the true label. This set of artifacts defines the benchmark used in the following sections. From it, Sect. V describes how the images were presented to the VLMs, how the responses were structured, and how the predictions were aligned with the outputs of the specialized detector.  

> V. USING A VLM FOR FRB DETECTION

This section describes how the VLMs were used to clas-sify the images generated in Sect. IV. The central point of the protocol is that the models were not trained, fine-tuned, or specialized for radio astronomy. They receive only the anonymous dynamic-spectrum image and a fixed textual instruction. The experiment thus tests a specific question. To what extent can a generalist VLM, used in a prompt-only regime, recognize visual patterns associated with FRBs and separate them from RFI and noise? The main task of the article is binary, FRB ver-sus NON FRB , to allow a direct comparison with the specialized detector. The multiclass formulation, 

FRB /RFI /NOISE , reveals a natural advantage of VLMs 10 and reinforces the potential thesis, by showing that the task can be redefined through the prompt without chang-ing the model weights.  

> A. Input supplied to the model

Each sample sent to the VLM consists of an anony-mous PNG dynamic-spectrum image. The image is ac-companied by a textual instruction, but no simulation metadata is provided to the model. In particular, the VLM does not receive the true label, the original FITS file name, the source class, the DM, the RFI parameters, or any identifier containing FRB , RFI , or NOISE .The instruction informs only how to interpret the im-age visually, with the horizontal axis as time, the ver-tical axis as frequency, and the pixel intensity as signal power. The model must infer the class from the visual morphology of the dynamic spectrum. This restriction is important because it differentiates the VLM task from the task of the specialized detector. The VLM operates on a single image, while SwinYNet is evaluated in its natural domain, from FITS files and its own processing pipeline.  

> B. Models evaluated

Two models from the Gemma 4 family were evaluated (Table IV). The smaller variant is referred to through-out the article as Gemma 4 2B, and the larger variant as Gemma 4 4B. Both are generalist, open-weight multi-modal models that can be run locally. In the protocol of this work, they are used strictly in zero-shot mode, that is, no weight is updated, no FRB-specific training set is used, and no labeled example is included in the prompt as a demonstration. This choice is deliberate. A specialized supervised clas-sifier, such as SwinYNet, is expected to be a strong ref-erence because it was designed for FRB searches. The VLM, on the other hand, is tested as a generalist model. Therefore, the result of interest is not only the final met-ric, but the capacity for visual transfer. Can the model apply general visual and textual knowledge to a special-ized scientific domain without fine-tuning? Local execution is also part of the motivation. Small models reduce the dependence on commercial APIs, per-token costs, and remote infrastructure. However, the op-erational evaluation must be made with caution. In the measured run, Gemma 4 2B took on average 5.4 s per file and Gemma 4 4B took 7.8 s per file, while each simulated file contains 2 s of observation. These values indicate fea-sibility for candidate triage or hybrid pipelines, but they do not, by themselves, demonstrate a brute-force real-time search. The timing measurements above were obtained on a workstation with an Intel Xeon w9-3495X processor (56 cores / 112 threads, up to 4.8 GHz), about 1 TB of RAM, and 4 NVIDIA RTX 4500 Ada Generation GPUs (24 GB each). Inference was run with the Hugging Face Transformers library [60], using device map="auto" , the model’s native precision, and greedy decoding, processing one image at a time, without batching. It is worth noting that the models themselves are small enough to fit on a single 24 GB GPU and were designed for execution on consumer hardware: Gemma 4 2B targets mobile devices and Gemma 4 4B targets personal computers. 1 The re-ported times therefore reflect this specific configuration, in a sample-by-sample regime and without optimization, and should be read as indicative, not as the latency ex-pected on a typical phone or personal computer.  

> C. Binary prompt and structured output

In the binary task, the prompt asks the model to clas-sify each image as FRB or NON FRB . The instruction defines 

FRB as a single localized transient, plausibly broadband, with a frequency-dependent arrival trend. The prompt also makes explicit that cases dominated by random noise, persistent bands, repetitive patterns, broadband impulses without a dispersion delay, saturation, blank regions, or normalization artifacts must be classified as 

NON FRB . The full binary prompt used is reproduced in Appendix A. The expected response is a JSON object. The most important field for the evaluation is frb probability ,a continuous estimate of the probability that the image contains an FRB. In addition, the model returns a tex-tual label, a confidence in the discrete label, a short jus-tification, and boolean visual attributes. The expected structure is shown in Listing 1. It is worth clarifying how frb probability is ob-tained, since it does not come from a closed-form formula computed over the image pixels. The value is reported by the model itself in the corresponding JSON field, in response to the prompt instruction to estimate, in the interval [0,1], the probability that the image contains an FRB. The prompt provides a calibration guide that asso-ciates probability ranges with different degrees of visual evidence, from a clear, textbook broadband dispersed sweep (0.95–0.99) to an unambiguous artifact such as sat-uration or clipping (0.01–0.04), and is reproduced in full in Appendix A. The pipeline only validates and lightly normalizes this number, converting any percentages to the [0,1] scale and clamping to the valid interval, and then uses it directly as the continuous score in the ROC and Precision-Recall curves; the binary label comes from the same score through the 0.5 threshold, as described in Sect. V D. Because it is a number that the model chooses, and not a quantity derived from the internal token prob-abilities, in practice frb probability takes few distinct values, a quantization discussed in Sect. VI B.  

> 1https://ai.google.dev/gemma/docs/core

11 

TABLE IV. Vision-Language Models evaluated and their role in the study. Model Role in the study Usage mode Mean time per file Gemma 4 2B Smaller generalist VLM zero-shot, prompt-only 5.4 s Gemma 4 4B Larger generalist VLM zero-shot, prompt-only 7.8 s Listing 1. Expected JSON structure returned by the model in the binary task. 

> {"label": "FRB|NON_FRB", "frb_probability": 0.0, "confidence": 0.0, "reason": "short explanation referencing the visual evidence", "features": { "visible_structure": true, "broadband": true, "localized_transient": true, "frequency_dependent_delay": true, "persistent_bands": false, "repeating_pattern": false, "uniform_or_constant_background": false, "saturated_or_clipped": false, "random_background_texture": false }}

Separating frb probability from confidence avoids a common ambiguity in evaluations with LLMs. The FRB probability represents the continuous score used for ROC curves, Precision-Recall curves, and calibra-tion analysis. The confidence, on the other hand, repre-sents only the degree of certainty declared by the model about the discrete label. For this reason, the probabilis-tic analyses of the article use frb probability , not the 

confidence field. 

D. Binary decision and operating threshold 

The binary label used in the metrics is derived from 

frb probability by a decision threshold. The default threshold is 0.5. Samples with frb probability ≥ 0.5are evaluated as FRB , and samples below this value are evaluated as NON FRB . This procedure ensures that the discrete decision is consistent with the continuous score used in the performance curves. The textual label produced by the model is preserved, but it is not the primary source of the decision when a valid probability exists. If the model’s text and the probability diverge, the sample receives a content warn-ing for auditing, instead of being re-run until it produces a more convenient response. This methodological deci-sion avoids rejection sampling and makes the evaluation more honest. 

E. Deterministic decoding 

All VLM inferences were made with deterministic de-coding, in greedy mode, without sampling. In practice, this corresponds to the use of temperature 0. Parameters such as top p and top k are not activated in this regime. The goal is to reduce the stochastic variation between runs, since the same image, the same prompt, and the same model should produce the same response, within the limitations of the execution environment. This choice responds, in part, to the instability observed in general-ist VLMs, whose outputs can vary with factors such as the decoding temperature [43]. By fixing deterministic decoding, we eliminate this stochastic component of the variation, although not the sensitivity to the prompt de-sign itself, taken up again in Sect. VI H. This choice is important for reproducibility. If sam-pling were used, part of the differences between models or runs could reflect decoding variation, not visual ca-pability. Since the study compares the VLMs with a specialized detector in a paired evaluation, reducing this source of variance makes the interpretation of the dis-agreements clearer. 

F. Handling invalid responses and execution failures 

The protocol separates execution failures from content failures. Transient errors, such as input/output prob-lems, timeouts, or recoverable memory failures, may al-low retries. Invalid content responses, such as malformed JSON or the absence of frb probability , are not re-12 sampled. The raw response is preserved, the sample is flagged with a warning, and the evaluation records the occurrence. This distinction is essential in order not to inflate per-formance artificially. If the model could be called re-peatedly until it produced a valid and coherent JSON, the evaluation would also measure a response-selection strategy, not just the model’s first decision. In the re-sults reported for the binary task, all 2000 samples were evaluated with no samples discarded due to error or in-valid response.  

> G. Multiclass task by prompt

Besides the main binary task, the same pipeline al-lows a multiclass formulation with the three labels FRB ,

RFI , and NOISE . In this mode, the prompt defines the dispersed burst and pure stochastic noise explicitly, and treats RFI as a residual class that collects any coherent structure that is neither of the two. The multiclass task is not used as the main axis of comparison with SwinYNet, because the specialized baseline is analyzed here in the binary formulation. Even so, the multiclass task is indeed relevant. The interest of the multiclass task is to show that the role of the VLM can go beyond an FRB versus NON FRB de-cision. On receiving a different instruction, the model can attempt to separate false positives associated with RFI from samples dominated by pure noise. This flexibility is an important property of generalist models, since the task can be redefined through natural language, without retraining and without changing the architecture. In this work, this flexibility is treated as supporting evidence of the potential of the VLMs, not as the central axis of the evaluation. The main quantitative compari-son remains the paired binary analysis against SwinYNet, and the multiclass task does not compete with it; it adds a demonstration that the same tool, without retraining, still distinguishes FRB , RFI , and NOISE when the prompt asks for three classes.  

> H. Comparison with the specialized detector

The VLM predictions are compared with the SwinYNet predictions by anonymous sample identifier. The comparison is paired: each sample id has a true label, a VLM prediction, and a prediction from the spe-cialized detector. This alignment makes it possible to measure not only aggregate metrics, but also agreements and disagreements sample by sample. The specialized baseline was used exactly as released by its authors, with no retraining, fine-tuning, or archi-tectural modification. We ran SwinYNet version 1.0.0, obtained from the official repository, 2 with the pre-trained weights distributed by the authors and the in-ference configuration provided in the released implemen-tation. Inference was applied to anonymized copies of the simulated PSRFITS files, carrying the same neutral 

sample NNNNNN identifiers used for the images, so that the leakage control described in Sect. IV also holds for the specialized detector. Each detection reported by the model carries a confidence value, which is taken as its continuous FRB score. For the binary comparison, the external SwinYNet outputs are normalized to the same representation used by the evaluation pipeline, with a continuous FRB score and a binary decision at the 0.5 threshold. When an ex-ternal model produces more than one detection for the same sample, the maximum score across the detections is used as the sample-level probability before the metrics are computed. It is important to stress again the input asymmetry be-tween the approaches. SwinYNet operates on the FITS files and was developed specifically for FRB searches, in-cluding steps that can exploit physical and temporal in-formation in more detail. The VLM receives only an anonymous PNG of the dynamic spectrum and a tex-tual instruction. The comparison should therefore not be interpreted as a direct competition between equiva-lent architectures, but as a measure of the potential of a generalist approach against a reference specialized detec-tor. In the following results section, this paired structure is the basis to answer three questions: which model has the best aggregate performance at the default threshold?; how do the models behave as probabilistic classifiers?; and in which types of NON FRB , especially RFI or noise, each approach tends to produce false positives?  

> I. Evaluation metrics

To answer these three questions, the predictions of the two VLMs and of SwinYNet are evaluated on exactly the same 2000 samples, taking FRB as the positive class. The metrics used throughout the paper are defined below and apply to all the tables in the following sections, grouped into three sets: threshold-dependent metrics, probabilis-tic (threshold-independent) metrics, and statistical tests for the paired comparison. 

Threshold-dependent metrics. Once the decision threshold is fixed, each binary prediction is a true posi-tive (TP), a false positive (FP), a false negative (FN), or a true negative (TN). From these counts, the accuracy is the fraction of correctly classified samples, accuracy = TP + TN TP + TN + FP + FN . (7)  

> 2https://github.com/expnn/SwinYNet

13 The precision of a class is the fraction of correct predic-tions among the samples predicted in that class, and the recall is the fraction of the samples of that class that the model recovered, 

P = TP TP + FP , R = TP TP + FN . (8) The F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, and the macro-F1 is the unweighted mean of the per-class F1 scores, 

F1 = 2P R P + R . (9) The false-positive rate (FPR) is the fraction of negative samples classified as positive, FPR = FP FP + TN , (10) also reported separately for RFI (FPR RFI ) and for noise (FPR NOISE ), using only the samples of each type. 

Probabilistic metrics. Independent of the threshold, these metrics evaluate the continuous frb probability 

score directly. The ROC-AUC is the area under the ROC curve and equals the probability that the model assigns a higher score to an FRB than to a NON FRB drawn at random, so that 1.0 indicates a perfect ranking and 0.5 indicates no discrimination. The Average Precision (AP) summarizes the Precision-Recall curve through the pre-cision averaged over the recall gains. The Brier score [61] is the mean squared error between the predicted proba-bility and the true label, and the ECE (Expected Cali-bration Error) [62] measures the mean deviation between the predicted confidence and the observed accuracy; for both, lower values indicate better calibration. 

Paired-comparison tests. To compare two models on the same samples, the McNemar test [63] checks whether the disagreements between them are statistically signif-icant, with low p-values indicating a real difference at the considered threshold, and the bootstrap confidence intervals [64] quantify the uncertainty of the differences (deltas) in ROC-AUC and AP between the models. Fi-nally, in the multiclass task, the support of a class is the number of true samples of that class in the evaluated set.  

> VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This section gathers the quantitative results of the bi-nary FRB versus NON FRB task. The comparison involves three systems evaluated on exactly the same 2000 bal-anced samples, namely the two generalist VLMs Gemma 4 2B and Gemma 4 4B, used only with a prompt, and the specialized detector SwinYNet, taken as a performance reference. The set contains 1000 FRB and 1000 NON FRB ,with the negative class split into 500 RFI and 500 NOISE ,and all samples were evaluated by the three models, with no record discarded due to inference error or invalid re-sponse. The discussion follows the three questions raised at the end of Sect. V H. The aggregate performance at the de-fault threshold is addressed in Sect. VI A, the behavior of the models as probabilistic classifiers in Sects. VI B and VI C, and the origin of the false positives in each type of NON FRB in Sect. VI D. Results and discussion appear together because the main metrics require imme-diate interpretation.  

> A. Binary performance at the default threshold

Table V summarizes the discrete metrics at the de-fault operating threshold of 0.5. The central result of this section is that both generalist VLMs, without any task-specific training and operating only with a prompt, achieve strong performance, with accuracy between 0.90 and 0.94 in separating FRB from NON FRB . At the 0.5 oper-ating point, Gemma 4 2B recorded an accuracy of 0.9365 and a macro-F1 of 0.9364, values close to those of the spe-cialized supervised detector SwinYNet (accuracy 0.9290, macro-F1 0.9286); Gemma 4 4B obtained an accuracy of 0.9045 and a macro-F1 of 0.9039. As Sect. VI B makes clear, this proximity at the 0.5 threshold should not be read as superiority of the VLM over SwinYNet; the spe-cialized detector has a perfect probabilistic ranking on this benchmark. It shows that a generalist model can reach performance similar to that of a dedicated detec-tor starting from almost no domain information. The most important reading of the table is not a sim-ple ranking of the models, but the error profile of each approach. SwinYNet recovered all the FRBs at the de-fault threshold ( FRB recall of 1.0000), that is, it produced no false negatives for the positive class. In contrast, it classified 142 NON FRB samples as FRB , reducing the pre-cision of the positive class to 0.8757. Gemma 4 2B was less complete for FRB (recall of 0.9050), but rejected the negative class better ( NON FRB recall of 0.9680). Gemma 4 4B was even more conservative, with higher precision for FRB (0.9821), but lower FRB recall (0.8240). This contrast of profiles is informative. SwinYNet be-haves as a detector oriented toward high recall, minimiz-ing FRB losses. The VLMs, especially Gemma 4 2B, op-erate more selectively at the 0.5 threshold, rejecting the negative class better. Therefore, a generalist model that displays this selective behavior without specific training is already an indication of the potential of the approach, taken up again in Sect. VI D. The confusion matrices in Table VI reinforce this interpretation. In the table, TP represents correctly identified FRBs, FN represents missed FRBs, FP represents NON FRB sam-ples classified as FRB, and TN represents NON FRB sam-ples correctly rejected. A point that deserves explicit comment is that the larger VLM performs worse than the smaller one at this operating point (accuracy 0.9045 against 0.9365). 14                                             

> TABLE V. Discrete metrics at the default operating threshold of 0.5, for the three systems, with precision and recall reported separately for FRB and for NON FRB . The metrics are defined in Sect. V I. Model Accuracy Macro-F1 Precision (FRB) Recall (FRB) Precision (NON FRB) Recall (NON FRB) Gemma 4 2B 0.9365 0.9364 0.9658 0.9050 0.9106 0.9680 Gemma 4 4B 0.9045 0.9039 0.9821 0.8240 0.8484 0.9850 SwinYNet 0.9290 0.9286 0.8757 1.0000 1.0000 0.8580 TABLE VI. Confusion matrices at the 0.5 threshold, with
> FRB as the positive class. TP, FN, FP, and TN are defined in Sect. V I. Model TP FN FP TN Gemma 4 2B 905 95 32 968 Gemma 4 4B 824 176 15 985 SwinYNet 1000 0142 858

The score distributions discussed in Sect. VI B indicate the origin of this inversion. Gemma 4 4B assigns low 

frb probability values more often than Gemma 4 2B (1161 against 1063 of the 2000 samples fall below the 0.5 threshold), so the fixed cut converts more faint FRBs into false negatives (176 against 95), even though the larger model rejects RFI slightly better (Sect. VI D). The inver-sion therefore reflects a more conservative scoring profile interacting with the fixed threshold and with the coarse quantization of the self-reported score, rather than a gen-eralized visual deficit of the larger model; in the multi-class task of Sect. VI G, Gemma 4 4B is consistently the better of the two.  

> B. Probabilistic performance

The continuous metrics, reported in Table VII, place the performance of the VLMs relative to the ceiling of the specialized detector. SwinYNet showed perfect probabilistic discrimination on this benchmark, with a ROC-AUC of 1.0000 and an Average Precision of 1.0000; that is, in the imported data, every FRB sample re-ceived a score above the highest NON FRB score (the lowest 

FRB score, 0.999999, exceeds the highest NON FRB score, 0.999864), which separates the classes perfectly by rank-ing. The generalist VLMs fall below this ceiling, but close to it: Gemma 4 2B obtained a ROC-AUC of 0.9482 and an AP of 0.9336, and Gemma 4 4B obtained a ROC-AUC of 0.9309 and an AP of 0.9102, a strong probabilis-tic performance for models without specific training. The corresponding ROC curves are shown in Fig. 3. This contrast requires a careful reading, so as neither to exaggerate nor to underestimate the result. Since SwinYNet ranks the classes perfectly, at an optimal threshold it would classify without errors; the 142 false positives it shows in Sect. VI A are an effect of the fixed 0.5 threshold, not a limit of the model. Hence, the ac-curacy proximity between Gemma 4 2B and SwinYNet at the 0.5 point is, in part, a threshold artifact, and not evidence that the VLM is superior. The defensible con-clusion is the opposite, and more interesting for the thesis of this article. Even starting from a perfect ceiling of the dedicated detector, a zero-shot generalist VLM recovers most of this discriminative capability (ROC-AUC in the 0.93–0.95 range) without seeing a single labeled example. It is also necessary to interpret these continuous met-rics with caution, because of a limitation present in the results. The probabilities emitted by the VLMs are strongly quantized (Fig. 4). Gemma 4 2B used only three values of frb probability across the entire bench-mark — 0.15 (996 samples), 0.25 (67), and 0.85 (937) — and Gemma 4 4B used nine distinct values. In practice, 

frb probability currently functions more as an ordinal confidence level than as a continuous score, so that ROC-AUC, AP, ECE, and the Brier score derive from curves with very few operating points. SwinYNet, on the other hand, saturates at or extremely close to 1.0 for the pos-itive samples. For this reason, these numbers should be read as a diagnostic of the scoring behavior in this im-plementation, not as a definitive probabilistic calibration of the models.  

> C. Paired comparison with SwinYNet

The sample-by-sample comparison, summarized in Ta-ble VIII, makes it possible to assess whether the differ-ences at the 0.5 threshold are statistically evident and whether the models err on the same cases. Gemma 4 2B and SwinYNet agreed on 1793 of the 2000 samples and disagreed on 207. Among the disagreements, Gemma 4 2B was correct in 111 cases in which SwinYNet erred, while SwinYNet was correct in 96 cases in which Gemma 4 2B erred. The McNemar test produced p = 0 .3305, so the discrete difference between the two models at this operating point is not statistically significant under the approximation used. Gemma 4 4B showed a different profile. It disagreed with SwinYNet on 307 samples. It was correct in 129 cases in which SwinYNet erred, but SwinYNet was cor-rect in 178 cases in which Gemma 4 4B erred. In this case, the McNemar test produced p = 0 .0062, indicating a significant advantage of SwinYNet at the 0.5 threshold. The bootstrap analysis of the scores reinforces the probabilistic advantage of SwinYNet. For Gemma 4 2B, the delta (VLM minus SwinYNet) was −0.0518 in ROC-AUC, with a 95% confidence interval between 15 

TABLE VII. Probabilistic performance metrics computed over the continuous frb probability score, for the three systems. The metrics are defined in Sect. V I (for the Brier score and the ECE, lower values are better). Model ROC-AUC Average Precision Brier score ECE Gemma 4 2B 0.9482 0.9336 0.0655 0.1011 Gemma 4 4B 0.9309 0.9102 0.0878 0.0706 SwinYNet 1.0000 1.0000 0.0569 0.1096 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0      

> False Positive Rate
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> Gemma 4 2B AUC=0.9482
> SwinYNet AUC=1.0000 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> False Positive Rate
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> Gemma 4 4B AUC=0.9309
> SwinYNet AUC=1.0000

FIG. 3. ROC curves for the binary FRB versus NON FRB task. Left: Gemma 4 2B; right: Gemma 4 4B. In each panel, the specialized detector SwinYNet attains a perfect ranking (AUC = 1.0000), whereas the staircase shape of the VLM curve reflects the small number of distinct frb probability values. 

−0.0616 and −0.0423; for Average Precision, the delta was −0.0664, with an interval between −0.0805 and 

−0.0530. For Gemma 4 4B, the deltas were even more negative: −0.0691 in ROC-AUC and −0.0898 in Average Precision. These results support a balanced reading that is favor-able to the thesis of the VLMs’ potential. At the default operating point, the discrete decisions of Gemma 4 2B show no statistically significant difference from those of a dedicated detector (McNemar p = 0 .3305), although SwinYNet remains superior as a probabilistic classifier on this benchmark. That a generalist model, without training and without access to the FITS, performs at the level of a specialized detector at the default threshold, with no statistically significant difference, is, by itself, strong evidence of what the approach is capable of do-ing. 

D. False positives by non-FRB type 

The stratification of the false positives by source class is one of the most revealing results about what the gen-eralist VLM actually learned. The NON FRB class aggre-gates RFI and noise, but these two groups represent dif-ferent difficulties for a search pipeline. Structured RFI tends to produce more problematic false candidates than stochastic noise, because it can partially mimic coherent structures in the dynamic spectrum. At the 0.5 threshold (Table IX), SwinYNet classified 125 of the 500 RFI samples as FRB, producing FPR RFI =0.250. Gemma 4 2B produced 32 false positives on RFI (FPR RFI = 0 .064), and Gemma 4 4B produced 15 (FPR RFI = 0 .030). On noise, the VLMs produced no false positives, while SwinYNet classified 17 of the 500 noise samples as FRB (FPR NOISE = 0 .034). Because the three systems were evaluated on the same samples, this gap can be tested directly. Restricting the McNemar test to the 500 RFI samples gives p = 3 .8×10 −21 for Gemma 4 2B versus SwinYNet (94 samples in which only the VLM is correct, against 1 in which only SwinYNet is correct) and p = 1 .8 × 10 −24 for Gemma 4 4B (112 against 2), so the better RFI rejection of the VLMs at this operating point is statistically significant. This table shows that the VLM is not merely recogniz-ing the shape of an FRB. It actively rejects structured RFI, which is precisely the most difficult type of contam-inant. At the default threshold, Gemma 4 2B and 4B classified as FRB only 6.4% and 3.0% of the RFI sam-ples, against 25% for SwinYNet, and no VLM produced a false positive on pure noise. For a model that was never trained on this task, distinguishing structured interfer-ence from a dispersed track is a concrete demonstration 16 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0      

> Predicted FRB probability
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> Samples
> Gemma 4 2B
> SwinYNet 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Predicted FRB probability
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> Samples
> Gemma 4 4B
> SwinYNet

FIG. 4. Histograms of the predicted frb probability for the binary task. Left: Gemma 4 2B; right: Gemma 4 4B. The VLM scores concentrate on a few discrete values, illustrating the strong quantization discussed in the text, whereas the specialized detector SwinYNet saturates near 0 and 1. TABLE VIII. Paired comparison between each VLM and SwinYNet at the 0.5 threshold, over the same samples. The disagree-ments column counts the samples for which the two models assigned different labels, and the two following columns split them between the cases in which only the VLM was correct and those in which only SwinYNet was correct. The McNemar test reported in the last column is defined in Sect. V I. Comparison Disagreements VLM right / SwinYNet wrong SwinYNet right / VLM wrong McNemar p

Gemma 4 2B vs SwinYNet 207 111 96 0.3305 Gemma 4 4B vs SwinYNet 307 129 178 0.0062 

of potential, and it suggests that the approach could, in real streams with many false RFI candidates, help reduce the inspection load. This conclusion must be limited to the current bench-mark. The data are simulated, the RFI categories are controlled, and the decision threshold was not optimized for a real survey. Even so, the result shows that the VLM goes beyond replicating the decision of the special-ized detector; it errs differently, and this difference may have practical value. 

E. Computational cost and operational use 

As detailed in Sect. V B, the mean inference time was 5.4 s per file for Gemma 4 2B and 7.8 s per file for Gemma 4 4B, measured on the workstation described there, in a sample-by-sample regime and without batch-ing. Since each simulated file contains 2 s of observa-tion, these times, which represent an upper bound in this unoptimized configuration, do not support a brute-force real-time search over a continuous data stream. On the other hand, this cost is already perfectly ac-ceptable for the triage of pre-selected candidates or for hybrid pipelines, and it tends to decrease substantially with batching, quantization, or even smaller models. It is also the scenario in which the textual explainability of the VLM adds the most value, since, in addition to decid-ing, the model justifies the decision in natural language, something rare in specialized detectors. 

F. Disagreements and cases exclusive to the VLM 

The disagreement files show that there are cases in which only the VLM is correct and cases in which only SwinYNet is correct. This information is richer than the aggregate accuracy. For Gemma 4 2B, there were 111 samples in which the VLM was correct and SwinYNet erred, against 96 in which the opposite occurred. In addition, 31 samples were wrong for both models. For Gemma 4 4B, there were 129 correct answers exclusive to the VLM, 178 correct answers exclusive to SwinYNet, and 13 common errors. The fact that there are dozens of samples that only the VLM gets right indicates that the generalist model captures visual patterns that the specialized detector lets through. To characterize these disagreements, each sample was cross-referenced with its source class and simulation pa-rameters, and the pattern is clear and almost symmetric. The VLM’s exclusive correct answers fall entirely on the negative class. For Gemma 4 2B, the 111 17                        

> TABLE IX. False positives by NON FRB source type at the 0.5 threshold. The false-positive columns count, for each model, how many RFI and NOISE samples were classified as FRB , out of the 500 of each type. The FPR is defined in Sect. V I, with lower values indicating better rejection of that contaminant. Model False positives on RFI FPR RFI False positives on NOISE FPR NOISE Gemma 4 2B 32/500 0.064 0/500 0.000 Gemma 4 4B 15/500 0.030 0/500 0.000 SwinYNet 125/500 0.250 17/500 0.034

samples in which the VLM is right and SwinYNet is wrong are 94 RFI and 17 noise, with no FRB, that is, cases in which the specialized detector produced a false positive and the VLM correctly rejected it. Among the RFI, the wifi multiband type dominates (67 of 94), followed by persistent narrowband (13), 

impulsive broadband (6), point to point microwave 

(4), and satellite like inband (4). The VLM’s ex-clusive gain therefore lies precisely in structured RFI, es-pecially multiband interference, the contaminant hardest to distinguish from a transient. The exclusive errors of VLMs, in turn, are almost only faint FRBs. For Gemma 4 2B, 95 of the 96 samples in which SwinYNet is right and the VLM is wrong are FRBs that the VLM missed (the 96th is an RFI). These FRBs are systematically of low intensity. The median flux density of the missed FRBs is 4.81, against 7.87 for the full FRB set (same internal units as Sect. IV D), and 67 of the 95 fall below the global 25th percentile (5.84); none exceeds 8.33, whereas the maximum of the set is 11.98. In the visual attributes reported by the model itself, these cases appear as having no visible structure and a random background texture. That is, the VLM perceived them as noise, consistent with FRBs of low visual intensity in the PNG. Gemma 4 4B repeats the same profile even more markedly. Of the 129 exclusive correct answers, 112 are RFI (85 wifi multiband ) and 17 noise; and of the 178 exclusive errors, 176 are faint FRBs, with a median flux density of 5.37 and 104 of the 176 below the global 25th percentile (5.84). This characterization turns the paired comparison into qualitative evidence of the VLM’s behavior. The general-ist model does not err randomly relative to the dedicated detector, since it gains exactly where SwinYNet stum-bles, rejecting structured RFI that the detector confuses with an FRB, and loses exactly on the faintest FRBs, near the detection limit. In real streams with many false RFI candidates, this complementary behavior has practi-cal value, although the loss of faint FRBs calls for caution regarding the fraction of FRBs recovered.  

> G. Multiclass classification

In addition to the binary task, a multiclass formulation was tested with the three labels FRB , RFI , and NOISE .This experiment is not the main axis of the comparison                                       

> TABLE X. Per-class metrics for the multiclass task (FRB /RFI /NOISE ), for both VLMs, on 1000 samples per class. Metrics and support are defined in Sect. V I. Model Class Precision Recall F1-score Support Gemma 4 2B FRB 1.0000 0.8700 0.9305 1000
> RFI 0.9889 0.5340 0.6935 1000
> NOISE 0.6289 1.0000 0.7722 1000 Gemma 4 4B FRB 1.0000 0.9210 0.9589 1000
> RFI 0.9565 0.6600 0.7811 1000
> NOISE 0.7199 1.0000 0.8372 1000

with SwinYNet, but it illustrates the flexibility of the VLM in redefining the task through the prompt. Both models were evaluated on the full simulated set of 3000 samples described in Sect. IV, with 1000 samples per class. This set is a superset of the binary benchmark, containing the same 1000 FRB samples together with all 1000 RFI examples (200 per subtype) and all 1000 NOISE 

examples, whereas the binary evaluation used 500 of each negative class. Gemma 4 4B reaches an overall accuracy of 86.0% (macro F1-score of 0.859) and Gemma 4 2B reaches 80.1% (macro F1-score of 0.799). The per-class metrics for both models are reported in Table X. The error structure is shared by the two models and is informative in itself. The FRB class is recovered with perfect precision (1.0000). No RFI or NOISE sam-ple is ever labeled FRB , so the reconfiguration to three classes introduces no false FRB. The NOISE class is re-covered with perfect recall (1.0000). Every noise sam-ple is identified as such. The whole difficulty con-centrates in the RFI class, whose recall (0.6600 for Gemma 4 4B and 0.5340 for Gemma 4 2B) is lim-ited by the faintest interference subtypes, which are systematically confused with NOISE rather than with 

FRB . Broken down by subtype, persistent narrowband 

and wifi multiband are recovered perfectly by both models, whereas the two faintest categories concen-trate the loss. point to point microwave (recall 0.075 for Gemma 4 2B and 0.260 for Gemma 4 4B) and satellite like inband (0.075 and 0.325, in the same order) account for 370 of the 466 and 283 of the 340 RFI -to-NOISE errors of the two models, with 

impulsive broadband in an intermediate position (0.520 and 0.715). This mirrors the faint-FRB behavior of the binary task. An interference signal whose visual contrast approaches the noise floor of the rendered image is read 18 as noise, in line with the dependence on the visual rep-resentation discussed in Sect. VI H. The mean inference time was 3.8 s per file for Gemma 4 2B and 4.3 s per file for Gemma 4 4B, below the binary-task figures reported in Sect. V B. This reduction follows directly from the design of the multiclass prompt. The instruction is deliberately compact and defines RFI as a residual class, anything that is neither a single dispersed sweep nor pure noise, instead of enumerating the inter-ference morphologies present in the benchmark, which would encode dataset-specific priors into the classifier. Its structured output is correspondingly lighter, dropping the probability field and the per-feature diagnostic block requested in the binary task, so that fewer instruction and output tokens are processed per image. Consistently with the demonstrative role of this experiment, no per-class prompt tuning was pursued; the multiclass prompt is reproduced in full in Appendix B. Even in this deliberately simple setting, the result is one of the clearest pieces of evidence of the potential pur-sued in this work. Without any retraining, and only by rewriting the prompt, the same model separates three classes and tells pure noise apart from structured RFI and from dispersed bursts. This reconfiguration of the task through natural language is something that a su-pervised detector does not offer without a new training cycle.  

> H. Threats to validity

Some limitations must be made explicit so that the results are interpreted correctly. First, the benchmark is simulated. This ensures label control, balancing, and reproducibility, but it does not capture the full complexity of real observational data, in-cluding instrumental effects, RFI variability, calibration, masking, defective channels, and real signal-to-noise dis-tributions. Therefore, validation on real data is a neces-sary step before any broad operational claim. Second, the comparison between the VLM and SwinYNet is asymmetric. SwinYNet was developed as a specialized detector and operates on FITS, while the VLM receives only a PNG image. This asymmetry favors the specialized detector in terms of access to information and should be seen as part of the experimental design. Precisely for this reason, the performance of Gemma 4 2B, so close to SwinYNet at the default threshold, is no-table, but it should not be described as proof of general superiority. Third, the dataset is balanced. This choice is appro-priate for an initial controlled comparison, but it does not represent the real prevalence of FRBs in astronomi-cal searches. In real scenarios, even a small false-positive rate can generate many false candidates. For this reason, Precision-Recall curves, threshold analyses, and evalua-tions under rare priors must be discussed before opera-tional use is proposed. Fourth, the VLM depends on the visual representa-tion. Colormap, normalization, resolution, contrast, and cropping can affect the decision. The result presented here holds for the image protocol described in Sect. IV. Future studies should test visualization ablations [65, 66] and compare the robustness to different ways of repre-senting the same FITS. The same care applies to the design of the textual prompt, since the outputs of gener-alist VLMs can vary with changes in the structure of the instruction [43]. As discussed in Sect. V E, deterministic decoding removes only the stochastic variation, not this dependence on the prompt, so that the results hold for the fixed prompt reproduced in Appendix A. Fifth, the probabilities produced by the VLMs in this run are quantized into few distinct values (three for Gemma 4 2B, nine for Gemma 4 4B). This makes the probabilistic and calibration metrics coarse and limits the ROC and Precision-Recall curves to few operating points. As indicated in Sect. VI B, obtaining a finer con-tinuous score is the next methodological step to make this part of the evaluation conclusive. Sixth, the evaluation is zero-shot with respect to this benchmark, in the sense that no labeled example from it is shown to the models, but the data used to pretrain generalist VLMs may include dynamic-spectrum figures of FRBs from the scientific literature. Some indirect prior exposure to the visual concept of a dispersed burst therefore cannot be excluded. This does not affect the paired comparison on these newly simulated images, but it should temper any reading of the results as evidence that the models had no previous contact with the do-main. Finally, the textual justifications of the VLM are use-ful for auditing, but they should not be automatically treated as correct physical explanations. A model can produce a plausible justification for a wrong decision. Thus, interpretability here should be understood as in-spectability of the decision, not as a guarantee of physical causality.  

> VII. CONCLUSIONS

This work shows that generalist, small, and local VLMs, used only with a prompt and without any spe-cific training, have a real potential for the analysis of FRB signals. In the FRB versus NON FRB task, Gemma 4 2B and 4B achieved an accuracy of 0.90–0.94 and a ROC-AUC of 0.93–0.95, with Gemma 4 2B showing no statistically significant difference from a specialized detector at the default threshold and rejecting RFI significantly more efficiently. Moreover, the same model proved capable of going beyond the binary decision and separating FRB ,

RFI , and NOISE only by changing the prompt. SwinYNet remains the performance reference, with a perfect probabilistic ranking on this benchmark. It is to be seen as a ceiling of a dedicated detector, to which a 19 zero-shot generalist model comes surprisingly close. The value of this work is not in declaring a winner, but in demonstrating that a generalist, inexpensive, and in-terpretable tool already recognizes FRB, RFI, and noise patterns with little domain information. This opens the way for applications in radio astronomy (triage, diagno-sis, and the detection of signal types not anticipated in the training of specialized models), and motivates the next steps, such as a finer probabilistic score, DM es-timation, and validation on real data. In addition, the adaptation techniques deliberately left out of this study — in-context (few-shot) learning, fine-tuning, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), and agents or calls to ex-ternal tools — can still be employed to further improve the results. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The work of A.R.Q. is supported by FAPESQ-PB. A.R.Q. acknowledges support by CNPq under process number 310533/2022-8. K.E.L.F., R.A.B., T.S.S.D. thank the Para´ ıba State Research Support Foundation (FAPESQ) for financial support. The work of R.H.S. and K.E.L.F. is supported by CNPq. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The code that generates, classifies, and evaluates the samples, together with the benchmark metadata (the label and image manifests), the per-sample predictions of the three systems, and the evaluation outputs, is openly available in the project repository at https:// github.com/raiffhugo/frb_svlm . The simulated PSR-FITS files and the rendered images are too large to be hosted in the repository (about 60 GB); they can be regenerated exactly from the pinned configuration and global seed described in Sect. IV, and are also available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The pipeline is implemented in Python and builds on open-source software: simulateSearch [44, 58], Hugging Face Transformers [60], PyTorch [67], NumPy [68], scikit-learn [69], Matplotlib [70], and Astropy [71]. 

Appendix A: Binary classification prompt 

The full binary prompt supplied to the model in the 

FRB versus NON FRB task is reproduced below, exactly as sent to the model. 

> You are an expert radio astronomer classifying dynamic-spectrum images from a transient-search pipeline. Image meaning: - x-axis: time - y-axis: frequency - intensity: signal power Classify the image as exactly one of: - FRB - NON_FRB Return ONLY valid JSON. No markdown, no comments, no extra keys. Decision rules: 1. FRB candidates Label as FRB only when the dominant signal is a SINGLE localized transient that is plausibly broadband and shows a frequency-dependent arrival-time trend, usually later arrival at lower frequency. The sweep may be curved, nearly linear, faint, or partially masked. 2. Low-S/N sensitivity Do not treat faint coherent structure as pure noise. If there is any plausible faint diagonal/curved sweep, localized broadband brightening, partial dispersed track, or excess variance along a tilted band, use an intermediate probability instead of a very low one. 3. NON_FRB cases Label as NON_FRB when the image is dominated by: - pure random background with no coherent transient, - persistent horizontal frequency bands, - persistent vertical time bands, - periodic stripes or grid-like structure, - zero-DM broadband vertical impulse with no dispersion delay, - saturation, clipping, blank regions, uniform panels, or normalization artifacts, - two or more temporally separated broadband pulses or repeating patterns. 4. Probability calibration frb_probability must be in [0,1].

20 

Use the full range and avoid always reusing the same values. Calibration guide: - 0.95-0.99: textbook FRB, clear broadband dispersed sweep. - 0.80-0.94: probable FRB with minor ambiguity. - 0.60-0.79: plausible FRB but faint, partial, or noisy. - 0.45-0.59: genuinely ambiguous. - 0.30-0.44: weak possible structure, more likely NON_FRB. - 0.18-0.29: likely noise or weak contamination. - 0.05-0.17: clear RFI, persistent bands, artifacts, or strong NON_FRB evidence. - 0.01-0.04: blank, saturated, clipped, or unambiguous artifact. Label consistency: - label = "FRB" only if frb_probability >= 0.50 - label = "NON_FRB" only if frb_probability < 0.50 confidence is how certain you are about the discrete label, not the FRB probability. Output exactly this JSON schema: {"label": "FRB|NON_FRB", "frb_probability": 0.0, "confidence": 0.0, "reason": "short explanation referencing the visual evidence", "features": { "visible_structure": true, "broadband": true, "localized_transient": true, "frequency_dependent_delay": true, "persistent_bands": false, "repeating_pattern": false, "uniform_or_constant_background": false, "saturated_or_clipped": false, "random_background_texture": false }}Feature definitions: - visible_structure: any coherent visual structure is present. - broadband: signal spans a substantial frequency range. - localized_transient: signal is confined to a short time interval. - frequency_dependent_delay: arrival time changes systematically with frequency. - persistent_bands: horizontal or vertical bands persist across much of the panel. - repeating_pattern: multiple pulses, stripes, grids, or periodic structures. - uniform_or_constant_background: panel is nearly blank or constant. - saturated_or_clipped: image has saturation, clipping, or rectangular masked regions. - random_background_texture: dominated by stochastic noise with no coherent candidate. The reason must be one short sentence. 

Appendix B: Multiclass classification prompt 

The prompt supplied to the model in the multiclass 

FRB /RFI /NOISE task is reproduced below, exactly as sent. In contrast to the binary prompt, it defines RFI as a residual class rather than enumerating interference mor-phologies, and requests a lighter JSON output without the probability field or the per-feature block. 

You are an expert in radio astronomy analyzing candidate images from a transient-search pipeline. The image is a dynamic spectrum: the horizontal axis is time, the vertical axis is frequency, and pixel intensity is signal power. Classify the image into exactly one of three classes: FRB, RFI, or NOISE. Decide only from the visual content of the image. Class definitions ================= NOISE The entire panel is featureless, stochastic background texture. There is no coherent structure anywhere: no lines, no stripes, no bands, no localized bright spots, no sweep, nothing but random fluctuations. 21 

> FRB A single astrophysical burst: one localized, broadband transient whose arrival time changes systematically ( monotonically) with frequency, tracing a single continuous sweep across the band. It appears only once, is confined in time, and neither repeats nor sits at a fixed frequency. RFI Anything else. Any image that is not pure NOISE and is not a single dispersed FRB sweep is RFI, i.e. any coherent, persistent, repeated, or artificial-looking structure of terrestrial or instrumental origin. Decision procedure ================= 1. Is there a single broadband sweep that drifts monotonically in frequency with time? If yes, label FRB. 2. Otherwise, is the panel pure random texture with no coherent feature at all? If yes, label NOISE. 3. Otherwise, label RFI. Rules ===== - NOISE requires a complete absence of coherent structure. If you can see ANY non-random feature anywhere in the panel -- even faint, even sparse, even a single thin line, a streak, or a few repeated marks -- the image is NOT NOISE. - Faint or sparse structure still counts as structure. - An FRB drifts in frequency and appears once. Signals that stay at a fixed frequency, form horizontal or vertical bands, or repeat in time are RFI, not FRB. - When unsure between RFI and NOISE, choose RFI. When a single drifting broadband sweep is unsure between FRB and RFI, prefer FRB. Output ====== Return ONLY a valid JSON object with this exact schema, and nothing else: {"label": "FRB|RFI|NOISE", "confidence": 0.0, "reason": "one short sentence citing the visual evidence" }confidence is how certain you are about the chosen label. Do not include markdown, code fences, comments, or any text outside the JSON object.

[1] D. R. Lorimer, M. Bailes, M. A. McLaughlin, D. J. Narkevic, and F. Crawford, “A bright millisecond radio burst of extragalactic origin,” Science , vol. 318, no. 5851, pp. 777–780, 2007. [2] J. I. Katz, “Fast radio bursts—a brief review: Some ques-tions, fewer answers,” Modern Physics Letters A , vol. 31, no. 14, p. 1630013, 2016. [3] E. Petroff, J. W. T. Hessels, and D. R. Lorimer, “Fast radio bursts,” The Astronomy and Astrophysics Review ,vol. 27, no. 1, p. 4, 2019. [4] B. Zhang, “The physical mechanisms of fast radio bursts,” Nature , vol. 587, pp. 45–53, 2020. [5] B. Zhang, “The physics of fast radio bursts,” Reviews of Modern Physics , vol. 95, no. 3, p. 035005, 2023. [6] K. M. Rajwade and J. van Leeuwen, “A needle in a cos-mic haystack: A review of FRB search techniques,” Uni-verse , vol. 10, no. 4, p. 158, 2024. [7] W.-Q. Ma and Z.-F. Gao, “The properties of fast ra-dio bursts: A short review,” Astronomische Nachrichten ,vol. 346, no. 7, p. e20250024, 2025. [8] E. Petroff et al. , “A real-time fast radio burst: polar-ization detection and multiwavelength follow-up,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. , vol. 447, no. 1, pp. 246–255, 2015. [9] J. M. Cordes and S. Chatterjee, “Fast Radio Bursts: An Extragalactic Enigma,” Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. ,vol. 57, pp. 417–465, 2019. [10] K. Bandura, G. E. Addison, M. Amiri, J. R. Bond, D. Campbell-Wilson, L. Connor, J.-F. Cliche, G. Davis, M. Deng, N. Denman, et al. , “Canadian hydrogen in-tensity mapping experiment (CHIME) pathfinder,” in 

Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes V, vol. 9145, p. 914522, SPIE, 2014. [11] S. Johnston, M. Bailes, N. Bartel, C. Baugh, M. Bieten-holz, C. Blake, R. Braun, J. Brown, S. Chatterjee, J. Dar-ling, et al. , “Science with the Australian square kilometre array pathfinder,” Publications of the Astronomical So-ciety of Australia , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 174–188, 2007. [12] R. Nan, D. Li, C. Jin, Q. Wang, L. Zhu, W. Zhu, H. Zhang, Y. Yue, and L. Qian, “The five-hundred-meter aperture spherical radio telescope (FAST) project,” In-ternational Journal of Modern Physics D , vol. 20, no. 06, pp. 989–1024, 2011. [13] F. Camilo, P. Scholz, M. Serylak, S. Buchner, M. Mer-ryfield, V. Kaspi, R. Archibald, M. Bailes, A. Jame-son, W. v. Straten, et al. , “Revival of the magnetar PSR J1622–4950: Observations with MeerKAT, Parkes, XMM-Newton, Swift, Chandra, and NuSTAR,” The As-trophysical Journal , vol. 856, no. 2, p. 180, 2018. [14] T. Lemos, R. S. Gon¸ calves, J. C. Carvalho, and J. S. Al-caniz, “Cosmological model-independent constraints on the baryon fraction in the IGM from fast radio bursts and supernovae data,” Eur. Phys. J. C , vol. 83, no. 2, p. 138, 2023. [15] J. A. S. Fortunato, W. S. Hip´ olito-Ricaldi, and M. V. 22 

dos Santos, “Cosmography from well-localized fast radio bursts,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. , vol. 526, no. 2, pp. 1773–1782, 2023. [16] T. Lemos, R. Gon¸ calves, J. Carvalho, and J. Alcaniz, “Cosmological model-independent limits on photon mass from FRB and SNe data,” JCAP , vol. 11, p. 019, 2025. [17] L. L. Sales, K. E. L. de Farias, A. R. Queiroz, J. R. L. Santos, R. A. Batista, A. R. M. Oliveira, L. F. San-tana, C. A. Wuensche, T. Villela, and J. Vieira, “Cosmo-graphic constraints from late-time probes including fast radio bursts,” 7 2025. [18] L. L. Sales, K. E. L. de Farias, A. R. Queiroz, R. A. Batista, B. W. Ribeiro, and R. H. Santos, “Constraints on the baryon density from fast radio bursts using a non-parametric reconstruction of the Hubble parameter,” 5 2026. [19] J. R. L. Santos, G. Dom` enech, and A. R. Queiroz, “Prob-ing Primordial Black Holes with upcoming Radio Tele-scopes: a case study for LOFAR2.0, FAST Core Array and BINGO,” 4 2026. [20] B. W. N. Ribeiro, L. L. Sales, K. E. L. de Farias, R. H. Santos, R. A. Batista, and A. R. Queiroz, “Constraints on Dark Energy and Modified Gravity Models from Fast Radio Bursts and Late-Time Geometric Probes,” 6 2026. [21] J. H. Cao, P. Wang, D. Li, Q. H. Pan, K. Mao, C. H. Niu, Y. K. Zhang, Q. Y. Qu, W. J. Lu, and J. S. Zhang, “BASSET: Bandpass-adaptive single-pulse search toolkit—optimized subband pulse search strategies for faint narrowband fast radio bursts,” The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series , vol. 280, no. 1, p. 12, 2025. [22] X. Yang, G. Hobbs, S.-B. Zhang, A. Zic, L. Toomey, Y. Li, J.-S. Wang, S. Dai, and X.-F. Wu, “Searching for short-time-scale radio anomalies using non-linear di-mensionality reduction techniques,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , vol. 537, pp. 991–1000, February 2025. [23] X. Yang, S.-B. Zhang, J.-S. Wang, and X.-F. Wu, “Clas-sifying frb spectrograms using nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques,” Monthly Notices of the Royal As-tronomical Society , vol. 522, pp. 4342–4351, July 2023. [24] S. M. Ransom, New search techniques for binary pulsars .PhD thesis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 2001. ADS Bibcode: 2001PhDT.......123R. [25] S. M. Ransom, “PRESTO: PulsaR exploration and search TOolkit.” Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1107.017, 2011. https://ascl.net/1107. 017 .[26] B. R. Barsdell, M. Bailes, D. G. Barnes, C. J. Fluke, A. Jameson, and I. G. Bebbington, “Accelerating inco-herent dedispersion,” Monthly Notices of the Royal As-tronomical Society , vol. 422, pp. 379–392, May 2012. [27] D. R. Lorimer and M. Kramer, Handbook of pulsar as-tronomy , vol. 4. Cambridge university press, 2005. [28] S. Belmonte D´ ıaz et al. , “Enhancing fast radio transient detection with mask r-cnn image segmentation,” RAS Techniques and Instruments , vol. 5, no. 1, p. rzag006, 2026. [29] X. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Xiao, H. Chen, Y. Ke, C. Miao, P. Wang, D. Li, C. Jin, L. He, et al. , “Accelerating the fast radio burst search: Data set and methods,” The As-trophysical Journal Supplement Series , vol. 280, no. 1, p. 34, 2025. [30] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. [31] Y. Chen, S. Ni, C. Li, J. Fang, D. Zhou, H. Chen, Y. Feng, P. Wang, C. Jin, H. Wang, et al. , “SwinYNet: A transformer-based multitask model for accurate and effi-cient fast radio burst searches,” The Astrophysical Jour-nal Supplement Series , vol. 283, no. 2, p. 45, 2026. [32] S. Yin, C. Fu, S. Zhao, K. Li, X. Sun, T. Xu, and E. Chen, “A survey on multimodal large language models,” Na-tional Science Review , vol. 11, p. nwae403, 12 2024. [33] B. He, F. Zhao, Y. Wang, P. Chen, X. Wang, D. Ma, H. Xu, and H. Li, “AstroSight: Galaxy morphology classification with multimodal large language models,” 

Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific ,vol. 138, no. 4, p. 044508, 2026. [34] D. Tanoglidis, C. Y. Tan, K. Overdeck, and A. Drlica-Wagner, “Do vision-language models see dwarf galax-ies the way we do?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07779 ,2026. Accepted at the Conference on Physics and AI (PAI 2026). [35] S. Zaman, M. J. Smith, P. Khetarpal, R. Chakrabarty, M. Ginolfi, M. Huertas-Company, M. Jablo´ nska, S. Kruk, M. L. Lain, S. J. R. M´ endez, et al. , “AstroLLaVA: to-wards the unification of astronomical data and natural language,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08583 , 2025. Ac-cepted at the SCI-FM workshop at ICLR 2025. [36] I. Kamai, M. Huertas-Company, M. J. Smith, and H. B. Perets, “Talking with the latents — how to con-vert your LLM into an astronomer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09670 , 2026. [37] F. Stoppa, T. Bulmus, S. Bloemen, S. J. Smartt, P. J. Groot, P. Vreeswijk, and K. W. Smith, “Textual inter-pretation of transient image classifications from large language models,” Nature Astronomy , vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1869–1878, 2025. [38] Gemini Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Mil-lican, et al. , “Gemini: a family of highly capable multi-modal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. [39] Gemma Team, “Gemma 4: Frontier Multimodal Intel-ligence on Device.” https://deepmind.google/models/ gemma/gemma-4/ , 2026. Released April 2026. Open weights under Apache 2.0. Google DeepMind. [40] F. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Wang, H. Li, M. Chen, P. Chen, N. Sun, C. Wang, and J. Liu, “Pulsar candidate clas-sification with multimodal large language models,” in 

NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Foundation Models for Sci-ence: Progress, Opportunities, and Challenges , 2024. [41] F. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Liu, P. Chen, C. Wang, J. Liu, H. Li, and Y. Wang, “Unveiling the power of multimodal large language models for radio astronomical image under-standing and question answering,” Machine Learning: Science and Technology , vol. 6, no. 4, p. 045005, 2025. [42] S. Riggi, T. Cecconello, A. Pilzer, S. Palazzo, N. Gupta, A. Hopkins, C. Trigilio, and G. Umana, “radio-llava: Ad-vancing vision-language models for radio astronomical source analysis,” Publications of the Astronomical Soci-ety of Australia , vol. 42, p. e121, 2025. [43] M. Drozdova, E. Lastufka, V. Kinakh, T. Holotyak, D. Schaerer, and S. Voloshynovskiy, “Radio astronomy in the era of vision-language models: Prompt sensitivity and adaptation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02615 , 2025. 23 

Presented at the Machine Learning and the Physical Sci-ences Workshop, NeurIPS 2025. [44] R. Luo, G. Hobbs, S. Y. Yong, A. Zic, L. Toomey, S. Dai, A. Dunning, D. Li, T. Marshman, C. Wang, P. Wang, S. Wang, and S. Zhang, “Simulating high-time resolu-tion radio-telescope observations,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , vol. 513, no. 4, pp. 5881– 5891, 2022. [45] C. D. Bochenek, V. Ravi, K. V. Belov, G. Hallinan, J. Kocz, S. R. Kulkarni, and D. L. McKenna, “A fast ra-dio burst associated with a galactic magnetar,” Nature ,vol. 587, pp. 59–62, 2020. [46] J.-P. Macquart, J. Prochaska, M. McQuinn, K. Bannis-ter, S. Bhandari, C. Day, A. Deller, R. Ekers, C. James, L. Marnoch, et al. , “A census of baryons in the uni-verse from localized fast radio bursts,” Nature , vol. 581, no. 7809, pp. 391–395, 2020. [47] J. Yao, R. Manchester, and N. Wang, “A new electron-density model for estimation of pulsar and frb distances,” 

The Astrophysical Journal , vol. 835, no. 1, p. 29, 2017. [48] J. M. Cordes and T. J. W. Lazio, “NE2001. i. a new model for the galactic distribution of free electrons and its fluctuations,” arXiv preprint astro-ph/0207156 , 2002. [49] Y.-K. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Feng, C.-W. Tsai, P. Wang, C.-H. Niu, H.-X. Chen, and Y.-H. Zhu, “DRAFTS: A deep-learning-based radio fast transient search pipeline,” The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series , vol. 276, no. 1, p. 20, 2025. [50] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, eds.), vol. 36, pp. 34892–34916, Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. [51] W. Ren, H. Guo, W. Zuo, and X. Zhang, “A sys-tematic evaluation of vision-language models for obser-vational astronomical reasoning tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24589 , 2026. [52] C. Chen, J. S. Xiao, S. D. Liu, F. P. Paolino, L. Handley, T. J. d. Laz, R. Nilsson, A. Zou, M. Graham, and A. Ma-habal, “AstroAlertBench: Evaluating the accuracy, rea-soning, and honesty of multimodal LLMs in astronomical classification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.05573 , 2026. [53] J. Shi, X. Tang, Y. Huang, Y. Li, X. Kong, Y. Zhang, and C. Yue, “AstroMMBench: A benchmark for evalu-ating multimodal large language models capabilities in astronomy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00063 , 2025. [54] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable vi-sual models from natural language supervision,” in Pro-ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , vol. 139, pp. 8748–8763, PMLR, 2021. [55] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vi-sion transformer using shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 10012–10022, 2021. [56] L. Parker, F. Lanusse, J. Shen, O. Liu, T. Hehir, L. Sarra, L. Meyer, M. Bowles, S. Wagner-Carena, H. Qu, et al. ,“AION-1: Omnimodal foundation model for astronomi-cal sciences,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, pp. 95386–95428, 2026. [57] Gemma Team, T. Mesnard, C. Hardin, R. Dadashi, S. Bhupatiraju, S. Pathak, et al. , “Gemma: Open mod-els based on Gemini research and technology,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295 , 2024. [58] G. Hobbs, R. Luo, and L. Toomey, “simulateSearch: High-time resolution data sets simulations for radio telescopes.” Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2205.025, 2022. https://ascl.net/2205.025 .[59] A. W. Hotan, W. van Straten, and R. Manchester, “PSRCHIVE and PSRFITS: an open approach to radio pulsar data storage and analysis,” Publications of the As-tronomical Society of Australia , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 302– 309, 2004. [60] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, J. Davison, S. Shleifer, P. von Platen, C. Ma, Y. Jer-nite, J. Plu, C. Xu, T. Le Scao, S. Gugger, M. Drame, Q. Lhoest, and A. M. Rush, “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pp. 38– 45, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. [61] G. W. Brier, “Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability,” Monthly Weather Review , vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 1950. [62] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of modern neural networks,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 1321–1330, PMLR, 2017. [63] Q. McNemar, “Note on the sampling error of the dif-ference between correlated proportions or percentages,” 

Psychometrika , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 153–157, 1947. [64] B. Efron, “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife,” The Annals of Statistics , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1– 26, 1979. [65] R. Meyes, M. Lu, C. W. De Puiseau, and T. Meisen, “Ablation studies in artificial neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08644 , 2019. [66] S. Sheikholeslami, “Ablation programming for machine learning,” Master’s thesis, KTH Royal Institute of Tech-nology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2019. https://urn.kb.se/ resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:kth:diva-258413 .[67] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. K¨ opf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Rai-son, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. [68] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gom-mers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Tay-lor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del R´ ıo, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. G´ erard-Marchant, K. Shep-pard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant, “Array programming with NumPy,” 

Nature , vol. 585, no. 7825, pp. 357–362, 2020. [69] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cour-napeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and ´E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. [70] J. D. Hunter, “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment,” 

Computing in Science & Engineering , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 90–95, 2007. 24 

[71] Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, P. L. Lim, N. Earl, N. Starkman, L. Bradley, D. L. Shupe, 

et al. , “The Astropy project: Sustaining and growing a community-oriented open-source project and the latest major release (v5.0) of the core package,” The Astro-physical Journal , vol. 935, no. 2, p. 167, 2022.