Title: Interplanetary scintillation-informed heliospheric modelling for the MeerKAT Pulsar Timing Array 4.5 yr dataset

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.09004v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Jul 2026 00:22:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026) Preprint 13 July 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3 

# Interplanetary scintillation-informed heliospheric modelling for the MeerKAT Pulsar Timing Array 4.5 yr dataset 

# Saurav Mishra, 1,2,3★ Daniel J. Reardon, 1,2 Andrew Zic, 3,2 Matthew Bailes, 1,2 John Morgan, 4

# Atharva D. Kulkarni, 1,2 Matthew T. Miles, 2,5 Ryan M. Shannon, 1,2 Caterina Tiburzi, 6,7

# Mark Cheung, 3 Michael Kramer, 8,9 Ruoyao Ni 10 

> 1

Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, P.O. Box 218, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia 

> 2

OzGrav: The ARC Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia  

> 3

CSIRO, Space and Astronomy, PO Box 76, Epping, NSW 1710, Australia  

> 4

CSIRO Space and Astronomy, Bentley, 6102, WA, Australia  

> 5

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 37235, USA  

> 6

INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Cagliari, via della Scienza 5, 09047 Selargius (CA), Italy  

> 7

INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera, via Brera 28, Milan, Italy  

> 8

Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie, Auf dem Hügel 69, D-53121 Bonn, Germany  

> 9

Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, University of Manchester, Alan-Turing Building, Oxford Street, Manchester M13 9PL, UK  

> 10

Imperial Colledge London 

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ 

ABSTRACT 

Heliospheric density variations impart delays on pulse times of arrivals from millisecond pulsars. Improper modelling of these variations may affect gravitational wave detection and characterisation by pulsar timing arrays (PTAs). Currently, PTAs typically employ a time-varying, spherically symmetric heliosphere model, which does not capture the full spatial and temporal complexity of the heliosphere. Instead, we investigate whether a three-dimensional, time-dependent model of the inner heliosphere from interplanetary scintillation (IPS) measurements – the IPS-UCSD model – can be employed to mitigate the solar wind in PTA analyses. We applied the IPS-UCSD model to the MeerKAT PTA 4.5-year dataset to assess whether it could correct for heliospheric density variations, and the impact on GW sensitivity compared to a spherically-symmetric model. We find that the model does not accurately correct for heliosphere-induced timing distortions, leading to bias in recovered GW parameters. Using simulations, we show that the spherically symmetric heliosphere model also fails to fully capture heliospheric density variations like those in the IPS-UCSD model. However, if interstellar dispersion measure (DM) variations are also modelled, then the heliospheric model errors are partially absorbed by DM variations, reducing contamination of the GW signal. Therefore we find that a time-varying spherically symmetric model is sufficient to mitigate the effect of heliospheric time delays on recovered GW results at typical PTA radio frequencies, provided other signal components are also modelled. We propose that the most precisely timed pulsars may be used to improve data-driven heliospheric density models in the future. 

Key words: Gravitational Waves - pulsars: general - solar wind - Sun: heliosphere 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Pulsars are precise natural clocks that can act as Galactic-scale de-tectors of nanohertz-frequency gravitational waves (GWs). GWs are expected to induce delays in pulsar times of arrival (ToAs) on the order of hundreds of nanoseconds (ns) over a timescale of years. Sources of nanohertz GWs include inspiralling supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHBs) and potentially early-Universe sources such as inflation or cosmic strings (e.g. Burke-Spolaor et al. 2019). The ensemble of all inspiralling SMBHBs creates a stochastic gravita-tional wave background (GWB), which induces delays in pulsar ToAs (Hellings & Downs 1983). By timing an array of pulsars over many years ( ≳ 5 yr) and searching for spatial correlation across various  

> ★

E-mail: smishra@swin.edu.au (SM) 

pulsar ToAs that has a particular form, known as the Hellings and Downs correlation (HD, Hellings & Downs 1983), the GWB signal can, in principle, be detected (Detweiler 1979). GW detection at nanohertz frequencies is performed using a pulsar timing array (PTA), which involves regular observations of millisec-ond pulsars (MSPs) distributed across the sky for multiple years (Foster & Backer 1990). These PTA datasets not only enable the detection of GWs but also provide insights into properties of the in-terstellar medium (ISM) and heliosphere. Multiple PTA groups, such as the Chinese Pulsar Timing Array (CPTA, Xu et al. 2023), the Euro-pean Pulsar Timing Array (EPTA, Antoniadis et al. 2023), the Indian Pulsar Timing Array (InPTA, Tarafdar et al. 2022), the MeerKAT Pulsar Timing Array (MPTA, Miles et al. 2022), the North Amer-ican Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav, Agazie et al. 2023), and the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array (PPTA, Zic 

© 2026 The Authors arXiv:2607.09004v1 [astro-ph.HE] 10 Jul 2026 2 Mishra et al. 

et al. 2023), collectively monitor approximately 130 MSPs. The PTA collaborations share data to form the International Pulsar Timing Array (IPTA, Perera et al. 2019). Recently, the PTA collaborations have reported evidence for a GWB signal in their data with weak to strong evidence. However, the signal remains below the 5 𝜎 detection threshold (Allen et al. 2023). Achieving this threshold requires accurate modelling of stochastic delays, spin irregularities, interstellar medium (ISM) turbulence, and heliospheric variations to avoid systematic errors. Inaccurate mod-elling of the aforementioned stochastic delays (noise processes) could lead to false detections of the GWB signal (see, e.g., Tiburzi et al. 2015; Goncharov et al. 2021; Di Marco et al. 2024) or bias the recov-ered GW spectrum (see, e.g., Zic et al. 2022; Reardon et al. 2023b; Di Marco et al. 2023, 2025). The plasma along the pulsar-Earth line-of-sight (LOS) induces radio-frequency–dependent dispersive delays ( Δ𝑡 𝑑𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑒𝑟 ) in ToAs that are quantified by the dispersion measure (DM), defined as 

DM =

∫ 𝐿 𝑎 

> 0

𝑛 𝑒 𝑑𝑙 (1) where 𝑛 𝑒 is the free electron density along the LOS to the pulsar at distance 𝐿 𝑎 . The corresponding delay is 

Δ𝑡 𝑑𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑒𝑟 = 𝐾 −1

> 𝐷

DM 

𝜈 2 (2) where 𝐾 𝐷 = 2.41 × 10 −4 MHz −2 pc cm −3 s−1 is the dispersion con-stant and 𝜈 is the observing radio frequency (see, e.g., Lorimer & Kramer 2004; Kulkarni 2020). The plasma in the pulsar-Earth LOS consists of plasma in the ISM (see, e.g., Keith et al. 2013), the heliosphere (see, e.g., You et al. 2007b) – the magnetised, supersonic plasma that completely fills the solar system, and around any binary companions, if relevant (see, e.g., Polzin et al. 2019). The changes in DM due to the ISM are related to the relative motion of the turbulent spatial structure in the ISM. The change due to such structures can be up to 10 −3 pc cm −3

(see, e.g., Backer et al. 1993; Hobbs et al. 2004; Keith et al. 2013). These changes in DM are very well modelled by a temporal power spectrum with a power law (see, e.g., Keith et al. 2013). Additionally, for typical separations of pulsars, these variations can be assumed to be completely independent from one pulsar to the next. The content of the heliosphere also causes significant dispersive delays for pulsars, especially for those with small ecliptic latitudes (ELAT) when they are observed close to the Sun (see, e.g., You et al. 2007b; Tiburzi et al. 2019; Susarla et al. 2024). The heliosphere is mostly filled with the charged stream of particles, which are com-ing out of the Sun. In PTA literature, these charged particles are referred to as Solar Wind (SW). However, in heliophysics, the term solar wind is often used to refer to the background outflow, while transient structures such as coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and co-rotating interacting regions are treated separately (Talpeanu et al. 2022). Therefore, heliospheric delay is the appropriate term for all delays caused by heliospheric plasma, whether background stream particles, or CMEs. In this paper, we use the term heliospheric delay, however, we use the notation “SW” for mathematical expressions of the noise model labels throughout this paper for consistency with recent work in the PTA literature. The dispersive delay due to the heliospheric plasma at typical L-band PTA observing radio frequencies ( 𝜈 ∼1400 MHz) can be on the order of 1 𝜇 s–100 ns (See, e.g., You et al. 2007a; Tiburzi et al. 2019, 2021; Kumar et al. 2022). Given the current sensitivity of PTAs, which can measure delays much smaller than 100 ns (Miles et al. 2022), it is crucial to accurately account for these heliospheric dispersive delays. To first order, the heliosphere is spherically sym-metric, reducing in density with distance from the Sun as an inverse square law. This causes a very strong annual variation which peaks when the pulsar passes close to the Sun. Traditionally, a static spherically-symmetric heliosphere model is been used to correct heliospheric delays in PTA data sets 1. This model assumes that the heliospheric electron density ( 𝑛 𝑒 ) varies inversely with the square of the radial distance ( 𝑟 ), that is, 𝑛 𝑒 (𝑟 ) =

𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

(1 AU /𝑟 )2, where 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

(cm −3) is the fixed electron density at 1 AU (Edwards et al. 2006; Aksim et al. 2019; Madison et al. 2019). The DM due to the heliosphere along the pulsar-Earth LOS at a certain angular separation 𝜃 (pulsar-observatory-Sun angle) is (Edwards et al. 2006) 

DM 𝑆𝑊 = 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

(1 AU )2 𝜋 − 𝜃 

rEarth sin 𝜃 , (3) where rEarth is the distance from the Sun to the Earth. This simple model captures the first-order behaviour of a heliosphere-induced de-lay that peaks sharply at solar conjunction (the closer to the ecliptic plane the pulsar is, the sharper and greater the peak is). As radio tele-scope sensitivity has improved the precision of ToA measurements, it has become evident that this static model does not adequately ac-count for heliosphere-induced delays (see, e.g., You et al. 2007a). Tiburzi et al. (2019, 2021); Hazboun et al. (2022); Niţu et al. (2024); Susarla et al. (2024) used a spherically symmetric heliosphere model with time-varying 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

(further detail in Section 2.1). Currently, stochastic variations of the density at 1 AU are modelled using the Fourier basis 2, typically assuming a power-law model of the power spectral density (PSD) of the variations (Hazboun et al. 2022). This modelling of a stochastic heliospheric density variations is therefore very similar to the approach taken to account for density variations in the ISM. It should be noted, however, that this approach does not take advantage of the known structure of the heliosphere and its variation with time. Moreover, unlike the ISM, heliospheric variations experienced by one pulsar cannot be assumed to be in-dependent of those experienced by others. Rather, the picture is of LOS from different pulsars at different times traversing a common heliosphere which is varying spatially and temporally in complex ways. This means that the heliospheric dispersive delays from ob-servations of different pulsars is spatially correlated, meaning that it can introduce noise that is correlated across multiple pulsars. This spatial correlation can partially mimic a GWB, potentially leading to spurious GW detection (Tiburzi et al. 2015). The current model to account for the delays due to the heliosphere used by PTAs lacks the complexity of the real heliosphere struc-tures (see, e.g., Coles 1996; McComas et al. 1998; Allen et al. 2020; Pierrard et al. 2020). For instance, the overall structure of the helio-spheric density varies over the (approximately 11-year) solar cycle, with approximate spherical symmetry at solar maximum changing to lower density over the poles at solar minimum (Coles et al. 1980). In addition, transients in heliosphere (e.g. Zhang et al. 2020) such as CMEs and stream and co-rotating interaction regions add further time-varying complexity that are not included in the current helio-sphere model (used in the PTA analysis).      

> 1Some PTA groups also use DMX to model chromatic delays. In DMX, a DM value is fit over a time bin spanning ∼1 hour to weeks (Jones et al. 2017). DMX is expected to absorb the heliospheric dispersive delays, so, there is no need to model the heliosphere separately.
> 2Niţu et al. (2024); Hazboun et al. (2025) modelled stochastic variations of the density at 1 AU using a time basis and covariance matrix MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 3

Work has been done to compare the spherically symmetric time varying heliosphere models with independent heliospheric density measurements in order to verify the accuracy of the models in PTA analyses. Hazboun et al. (2022) compared the sampled values of 

𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

inferred in PTA analyses with Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE 3) measurements of 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

. Similarly, Susarla et al. (2024) com-pared 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

measurements inferred using stochastic modelling of heliosphere with OMNI data 4. However, all of these data come from very close to Earth (the Sun-Earth L1 Lagrange point) and therefore cannot capture the full 3D structure of the heliosphere. heliospheric contributions to pulsar DM are dominated by the point of the LOS closest to the Sun, which can lie at any point within the inner helio-sphere. Both You et al. (2007b) and Kumar et al. (2022) have com-pared pulsar data with two very different heliosphere models. You et al. (2007b, 2012) used a combination of the structure fast and slow solar wind to account for heliospheric delays, whereas Kumar et al. (2022) utilised Wang-Sheeley-Arge–ENLIL, a large-scale he-liospheric model (Pizzo et al. 2015). However both were ultimately derived from magnetic field observations of the Sun, which can then be empirically converted into densities. Both demonstrated an im-provement over simpler models. However, magnetometry is most accurate on the portion of the solar surface directly facing the Earth, whereas the heliosphere that most affects pulsar measurements orig-inates from the poles or the limb of the Sun. The measurements of heliosphere made using Interplanetary Scin-tillation (IPS) which has been used for decades to track heliospheric densities (Xiong et al. 2023), provides a promising avenue for pro-viding information on the full three-dimensional (3D) time-varying heliosphere. Measurements of the scintillation level of tens of sources scattered across the sky have been made daily by purpose-built in-struments (Tokumaru et al. 2011). These measurements can then be used to construct a 3D, time-varying model of the heliosphere (Jackson et al. 2020). These reconstructions have been validated by comparison with L1 measurements of density and velocity, and have been shown to be highly competitive with other widely-used space weather models (Jian et al. 2015). A particular advantage of IPS-based heliosphere models for pulsar timing applications is that the data from which these observations are derived are LOS integrated measurements made over multiple solar elongations and latitudes, and therefore directly probe the heliosphere that is most influential on pulsar observations. IPS-based heliosphere reconstructions were recently compared with DM measurements of some pulsars observed very close to the Sun using LOFAR radio telescopes (Tiburzi et al. 2023). These reconstructions were generated using the University of California San Diego (UCSD) heliosphere 3D tomography reconstruction tech-nique. Compared to models derived from single-point in-situ mea-surements close to the Earth, 3D tomography of the heliosphere from IPS can provide a more accurate model by incorporating more detailed information on the heliospheric origin “transients” such as stream interaction regions and coronal mass ejections throughout the heliosphere, while also providing a better representation of the overall 3D structure of the heliosphere. The Tiburzi et al. (2023) study compared the heliosphere model derived from IPS-UCSD 3D tomography using pulsar observations            

> 3ACE is aNASA explorer designed to study the heliosphere. https://www.swpc.noaa.gov/products/ace-real-time-solar-wind
> 4OMNI provides hourly-averaged measurements of heliospheric magnetic field and density, running since 1963 (Papitashvili et al. 2014)

at low radio frequencies (100-190 MHz) on a small data set, which motivated a study that uses 3D heliosphere reconstructions from IPS-UCSD with a much larger dataset from PTAs. However, other PTAs, including the MPTA, often observe pulsars at higher fre-quencies where the effect of delays due to the heliospheric variation is reduced. This motivates the study in this paper, which utilises IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstructions with a much larger observational dataset spanning radio frequencies from 0.8-1.7 GHz. This work is focused on taking advantage of the 3D time-dependent heliosphere model in PTA dataset where (i) We test whether this model can simply be assumed to be correct (mitigating the need to infer the true heliosphere from the PTA datasets). We utilise the MPTA dataset as it is one of the most sensitive PTA across the globe. (ii) We utilise the 3D time-dependent heliosphere model to search for GWB on MPTA dataset and compare the recovered GWB parameters against those obtained using a spherically symmet-ric heliosphere model. (iii) We treat these heliosphere reconstructions as a “plausible” realisation of the heliospheric delays, apply it to simulations of PTA mock data, and see if existing heliosphere model in PTA are able to model it (sufficiently that GWs can be recovered without error.) In Section 2, we describe the dataset and methods used for mod-elling stochastic noise processes, simulating the heliospheric delays, and recovering spatial-correlations in the data like the GWB. In Sec-tion 3 we describe our results including a comparison of the strength of the recovered GWB under different heliosphere models. We also assess how different heliosphere models affect the recovered spatial correlation of the GWB signal. We discuss and conclude the results in Section 4. 

2 OBSERVATIONS AND METHODOLOGY 2.1 Stochastic noise modelling in Pulsar Timing Array 

Radio waves from pulsars experience multiple delays, including frequency-dependent delays caused by plasma in the ISM and he-liosphere, Rømer delays, and Shapiro delays (Foster & Backer 1990; Edwards et al. 2006; Hobbs et al. 2006). All of these physical phe-nomena must be accounted for when predicting the ToA of pulses through a model known as the timing model. These physical phe-nomena can be parameterised through timing model parameters, which thereby provide information about the astrophysical proper-ties of pulsars, such as mass and rotation. The timing model fitting is performed using software packages such as tempo2 (Edwards et al. 2006; Hobbs et al. 2006) or PINT (Luo et al. 2021), and is typically performed using frequentist least-squares methods. However, the deterministic timing model is not a perfectly accurate description of ToAs; there can still be some correlated structure remaining in the difference between observed and predicted ToA, known as the timing residual ( 𝛿𝑡 ). The structure in the residuals may arise due to some unmodelled time-correlated stochastic signal (𝛿𝑡 stoch ), or any missing deterministic signal ( 𝛿𝑡 deter ) in the timing model along with some time-uncorrelated stochastic signal due to uncertainty in the measurement of the ToAs. Therefore, the residuals can be written as 

𝛿𝑡 = 𝛿𝑡 stoch + 𝛿𝑡 deter (4) One origin of time-correlated stochastic signals in pulsar timing  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# 4 Mishra et al. 

data is the turbulent plasma within the ISM and the heliosphere, which impart dispersive delays and scattering upon the pulsar radi-ation along the LOS. The GWB itself also induces stochastic varia-tions in the ToAs (Detweiler 1979). These time-correlated stochastic signals typically have a red power spectrum. In PTA data analysis, time-correlated stochastic signals are usually modelled as the Fourier basis using Gaussian process (GP) as 

𝛿𝑡 stoch (𝑡 𝑖 ) =

> 𝑁 modes

∑︁ 

> 𝑙 =1

[𝑐 𝑙 sin (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑙 𝑡 𝑖 ) + 𝑑 𝑙 cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑙 𝑡 𝑖 )]× 𝑋 stoch (Θ𝑡 ), (5) where 𝑁 modes is the total number of Fourier frequencies being mod-elled for stochastic signals (Lentati et al. 2013). 𝑓 𝑙 = 𝑙 /𝑇 span rep-resents the 𝑙 th frequency component, whereas 𝑇 span is the span of the dataset. 𝑋 stoch (Θ𝑡 ) is an additional function that parametrises the dependence of the delays on other parameters such as the radio fre-quencies or the solar elongation. 𝑐 𝑙 and 𝑑 𝑙 are the Fourier coefficients. These coefficients are derived from a Gaussian distribution with vari-ance defined using a PSD. The PSD can either be written as a “free spectrum”, where the quadrature sum of the components √︃ 𝑐 2 

> 𝑙

+ 𝑑 2

> 𝑙

is indepently fit for each frequency component, or constrained using a model such as a power law ( Pstoch )

𝑃 stoch ( 𝐴, 𝛾 ; 𝑓 ) = 𝐴 2

12 𝜋 3 𝑓 3yr 

 𝑓 𝑓 yr 

 −𝛾 

(6) where 𝐴 and 𝛾 refer to the amplitude and the spectral index of the PSD function that describes the stochastic process. Here, the 𝑐 𝑙 and 

𝑑 𝑙 Fourier coefficients are subject to the constraint that √︃ 𝑐 2 

> 𝑙

+ 𝑑 2

> 𝑙

follows the power spectral density specified by Eq. 6, while the phase 

arctan (𝑐 𝑙 /𝑑 𝑙 ) is left unconstrained and is marginalised out of the fit – see Taylor (e.g. 2021) for more details. For each stochastic process, a 𝑃 stoch is defined using a PSD for that process. It is important to define PSDs for different stochas-tic processes differently to avoid mismodelling of various stochastic processes, and this is where 𝑋 stoch plays a key role. 𝑋 stoch is unity for achromatic time-correlated processes such as pulsar spin irregulari-ties ( 𝑋 RN ) or GWB, whereas for chromatic time-correlated processes (depending on observing radio frequency), 𝑋 stoch is defined in differ-ent ways, including: 

𝑋 RN = 1 (7a) 

𝑋 DM (𝜈 ) =

 𝜈 𝜈 ref 

 −2

(7b) 

𝑋 chrom (𝜈, 𝛽 ) =

 𝜈 𝜈 ref 

 −𝛽 

(7c) 

𝑋 SW (𝜈 ; 𝜃 ) = DM SW (n1 AU e = 1; 𝜃 )

 𝜈 𝜈 ref 

 −2

, (7d) where 𝜈 ref is the reference frequency, which is typically defined as 1400 MHz. For this work, we are using the power-law description of various stochastic processes as discussed in the Miles et al. (2024a). 

𝑋 DM represents the change in variation in DM due to the turbu-lent nature of ISM (Phillips & Wolszczan 1991) which is modelled as a stochastic time-correlated signal. 𝑋 chrom accounts for radio-frequency-dependent delays that may be due to small-scale structure present in ISM that causes multi-path scattering due to diffraction of the pulsar signal. This multi-path scattering is also modelled as a time-correlated stochastic variation, but with different frequency dependence 𝛽 . This may be set to a value of 4 if assuming standard cold-plasma theory (e.g. Lorimer & Kramer 2004), or be allowed to vary if relaxing the cold-plasma assumptions. 𝑋 SW represents changes in the dispersive heliospheric delays due to changes in 𝑛 1 AU 

> 𝑒

over time. Here, DM SW is given in eq. 3, and accounts for the ad-ditional column density arising from the change in the pulsar-Sun elongation angle within a spherically-symmetric heliosphere. There are also “deterministic” signals ( 𝛿𝑡 deter ) such as chromatic Gaussian jumps/dips, which arise from deviations from power-law stochastic processes in the ISM due to the presence of small-scale structures, annual variations in chromatic signals caused by Earth’s orbital motion around the Sun, exponential-like delays due to sudden pulse profile shape changes, and mean delays due to the heliospheric variations (Reardon et al. 2023b). We use the term “deterministic” here following standard parlance in the PTA noise modelling lit-erature, but note that these terms are not physically deterministic. Instead these “deterministic” terms denote processes that can be written parametrically in the time domain, rather than described sta-tistically through some description of its power spectrum.A detailed description of all these deterministic signals modelled on the MPTA dataset can be found in Miles et al. (2024a). For this work, the mean delay due to the heliospheric variations, is particularly relevant as we fit for the mean value of 𝑛 1 AU  

> 𝑒

using the dispersion measure from the variations in the heliosphere based on eq. 3. We also model time-uncorrelated stochastic signals. These stochastic signals behave as excess white noise, as the uncertainty on any ToA derived from standard pulsar timing procedures arises largely from the thermal noise of the telescope. However, there are additional sources of white noise that must be accounted for. The white noise term consists of EFAC, EQUAD, and ECORR. EFAC and EQAUD model the unaccounted systematics and imperfections in the pulse template fitting, such as those due to the observing and backend system of the radio telescope, and ECORR accounts for short timescale pulse shape variations known as pulse jitter (see, e.g., Shannon et al. 2014; Parthasarathy et al. 2021; Kulkarni et al. 2024). The white noise is modelled by modifying the uncertainty of ToA measurements as done in see e.g., Reardon et al. (2023b). For the MPTA DR2 (Miles et al. 2024a) we only have one receiver and backend combination across the data set. We explain this now, in the context of other PTA analyses where the white noise parameters are defined for each combination. The GWB at nanohertz frequencies induces a stochastic delay in all pulsars. These delays are common to all pulsars and are spatially correlated according to HD correlation relation. The HD correlation is defined using a two-point correlation function, the ORF, Γ𝑎𝑏 . The correlation due to GWB is written as (Hellings & Downs 1983): 

ΓHD  

> 𝑎𝑏

= 12 (1 + 𝛿 𝑎𝑏 ) − 1 − cos 𝜁 𝑎𝑏 

4

 12 − 3 ln 

 1 − cos 𝜁 𝑎𝑏 

2

 

(8) where 𝜁 𝑎𝑏 is the sky-separation angle between pulsar 𝑎 and pulsar 𝑏 .However, for modelling the GWB, we need to add information about spatial correlation due to the GWB to the PSD function. Therefore, the power-law PSD due to the GWB is written as: 

𝑃 HD = 𝑃 stoch ( 𝐴 GWB , 𝛾 GWB ) × ΓHD  

> 𝑎𝑏

. (9) Once the parameters describing various processes are defined, the model parameters are inferred using Bayesian inference with 

enterprise (Ellis et al. 2019) and enterprise_extensions (Taylor et al. 2021) using ptmcmcsampler (van Haasteren et al. 2009; van Haasteren & Levin 2012; van Haasteren & Vallisneri 2014; Ellis & van Haasteren 2017) as described in Miles et al. (2024a). We de-fine prior function over the modelled parameters describing various stochastic and determinstic signal. Typically, the timing model pa-rameters are analytically marginalised out, leaving only the posterior  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 5

probability distributions of the parameters for the various noise pro-cesses to be determined. The most important parameters for this work are 𝐴 GWB and 𝛾 GWB . However, using P HD requires a large amount of computational resources and time. So for a sensible rough estimate of 𝐴 GWB and 𝛾 GWB , the cross-correlation is ignored, that is the 𝐴 GWB 

and 𝛾 GWB are inferred as a uncorrelated common red noise (CRN) using the pulsar auto-correlations only. We call the fitted CRN pa-rameters 𝐴 CRN and 𝛾 CRN (Reardon et al. 2023a; Miles et al. 2024a; Gersbach et al. 2025). After obtaining the values of 𝐴 CRN and 𝛾 CRN , a frequentist de-tection statistic is employed, known as the optimal statistic (OS), to fit for the value of 𝐴 GWB using the determined inter-pulsar covari-ances/correlations, as described in Chamberlin et al. (2015); Gers-bach et al. (2025). The OS can also be used to search for another correlations due to common-spectrum signals with e.g., monopolar or dipolar patterns (Caballero et al. 2018; Hobbs et al. 2020). A monopole correlation can exist, for example, because of an error in the observatory clock which is used as a reference for ToAs measure-ment, whereas a dipole correlation can be, for example, due to errors in the position and motion of planets. The enterprise_extensions 

contains the OS code which has been used in this work and the same code also calculates the inter-pulsar covariances/correlations. The first heliosphere model considered in this paper is the spheri-cally symmetric heliospheric model. This heliosphere model consists of two components: a deterministic component SW mean that is mod-elled using Eq.3, where 𝑛 1 𝐴𝑈 𝑒 is fitted as a free parameter, and the stochastic component that uses a GP on 𝑛 1 𝐴𝑈 𝑒 , SW GP . The PSD de-scribing variations in 𝑛 1 𝐴𝑈 𝑒 is assumed to follow a power-law as given in Eq. 6, with an additional function defined as 𝑋 SW as described in Eq. 7d. In Section 2.3, we describe the application of the IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed heliospheric model to the PTA noise model frame-work described above, as an alternative to the spherically symmetric model. 

2.2 MeerKAT PTA dataset and noise models 

In this work, we use the 4.5 −year dataset released as MPTA DR2 (Miles et al. 2024a) spanning from 2019-2023. 83 MSPs are part of MPTA DR2, and for each pulsar, the ToAs are collected using the MeerKAT radio telescope (Jonas & MeerKAT Team 2016) in South Africa, observing in the L-band radio frequency range (856-1712 MHz). The details of the MPTA observing strategy can be found in Miles et al. (2022). MPTA DR2 has been searched for a uncorrelated CRN process (e.g., a GWB) in the data (Miles et al. 2024b). For this work, we begin with a similar search for noise processes, following the analysis methods from MPTA DR2. We perform searches for a spatially-uncorrelated CRN using following 3 heliosphere models: a) “SW mean +SW GP ” based on the MPTA DR2, b) “SW IPS ” for each pulsar, c) “SW IPS +SW GP ” for all pulsars. where “SW mean +SW GP ” is based on the spherically symmetric model described in Section 2.1. “SW IPS ” represents the heliosphere model based on IPS-derived heliospheric variations using UCSD 3D-tomography as described in Section 2.3. “SW IPS +SW GP ” repre-sents a combined model of spherically symmetric heliosphere and IPS-UCSD derived heliospheric variations.  

> 6The sunspot numbers are counted through the Sunspot Index and Long-term Solar Observations https://www.sidc.be/SILSO/home

After each CRN search, we reconstruct the time domain realisa-tions (see, e.g., Iraci et al. 2024, Appendix A for the mathematical detail about time-domain realisations) of various signals in the data to compare the inferred properties of the various modelled signal in presence of different heliosphere models. In brief, this reconstruction of time-domain signals is based on sampling the Fourier coefficients from the distributions defined by the inferred PSD parameters, con-ditioned on the information provided by the timing residuals. We use PSR J1909 −3744 to compare the heliospheric delays, DM variations, and CRN signal because this pulsar is the most precisely timed pulsar in MPTA DR2, with median ToA error of 0.214 𝜇𝑠 . PSR J1909 −3744 clearly exhibits heliospheric variations in the DM time series (with DM measured independently with tempo2 at each observing epoch) as shown in Fig. 1 due to its proximity to the ecliptic plane (ELAT=-15.15 ◦). Once each CRN search is complete, we also calculate the OS to investigate the strength of correlations using 3 ORFs: HD, dipole, and monopole correlations. 

2.3 Interplanetary scintillation and the heliosphere modelling using the UCSD 3D tomography 

Interplanetary Scintillation (IPS) has been used in studies of com-pact radio sources since its discovery (Hewish et al. 1968). IPS occurs when radio waves from a distant compact source scatter off electron density irregularities in the heliospheric plasma. This scattering pro-duces a diffraction pattern at the observer, and the motion of these irregularities causes the observed intensity to fluctuate temporally (Hewish et al. 1964). The strength of the IPS is quantified by the scintillation index – the ratio of measured intensity fluctuations to the mean intensity of the compact source. The strength of IPS has been shown to be strongly correlated with the heliospheric density (see Section 3 in Manoharan 1993) because both the scintillation index and the heliospheric density fluctuations depend strongly on the heliospheric distance (distance to plasma from the Sun), while the mean heliospheric density also depends strongly on the heliospheric distance (see eq. 2 in Manoharan 1993). In addition, the scintillation enhancement factor – defined as the ra-tio of measured scintillation index to the expected value in the weak scattering limit – provides additional information. Tappin (1986) sug-gested a power-law relation between the scintillation enhancement factor and electron density at a given heliocentric distance. Therefore, measuring scintillation at low frequencies enables determination of electron density in the heliosphere. The UCSD 3D tomography reconstruction technique can be used to map the density and velocity of the heliosphere at each point in space. This technique assumes an initial heliospheric velocity and density at radius 15 𝑅 ⊙ and evolves these values using a model that conserves mass and mass flux for a radially outward-moving heliospheric plasma, up to a radial distance of 3 AU. The scintillation enhancement factor along the IPS source LOS is predicted, and an iterative least-squares fitting technique is applied to match the model-derived scintillation enhancement factors with measurements. After several iterations, a 3D map of heliospheric density and velocity is obtained. The reader is referred to the recent review of Jackson et al. (2020) for further details. For this work, we use these IPS-UCSD 3D tomography 7 recon-structions of heliosphere density. These reconstructions are based on input data consisting of IPS velocities and densities obtained us-ing a network of dedicated radio telescopes Japan (Tokumaru et al.   

> 7https://ips.ucsd.edu/ MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# 6 Mishra et al. 

Figure 1. DM measurements from PSR J1909 −3744 using MeerKAT L-band observations. The grey regions show when the pulsar is within 40 degrees of the Sun. There are annual variations in the DM, e.g. clear DM enhancements around MJDs 58850, 59200, 59600, and 59950, which coincide with epochs of increased solar activity and small Sun-pulsar angular separations. At these times the change in the DM are of the order of 10 −4 pc cm −3, which is the expected change in DM due to the heliospheric plasma. The green curve represents a static spherically symmetric heliosphere model with n1 AU e = 4.909 cm −3, offset by 10.39 pc cm −3 to bring these variations to a similar level as the DM measurements shown in red. The amplitude of these annual DM variations appears to increase through the dataset. This is due to the increase in solar activity, indicated by the Sunspot number 6in grey on alternate y axis. The long term variations in DM are associated with the changes in the interstellar plasma. Note that in the timing model used to measure the DMs, no model is included to account for heliospheric dispersive delays. 

Figure 2. Two different cuts through volumetric density reconstructions at two different epochs. The upper plots and lower plots are separated by 2 days. The left plots show approximately ecliptic plane cut of the heliosphere (thr ecliptic pole and the SUn’s rotational pole differe by 7 ◦ Seidelmann et al. (2007)) with longitude values in degrees, the right plots represent the perpendicular cut of the heliosphere with latitude values in degree. The inner boundary at 15 𝑅 ⊙

is just visible, and the Earth is shown as a cyan dot. The colour bar represents the normalised electron density. Both the plots are shown in the Stonyhurst coordinate system (a coordinate system used in heliophysics, defined by the rotation of the Sun, with Sun at the origin. The z −axis or longitude +90 ◦

representing Sun’s north pole, and the x −axis or longitude 0 and latitude 0 aligns with the projection of the Sun −Earth separation onto the Sun’s equatorial plane (The SunPy Community et al. 2020) ). 

2011) operating at 327 MHz. These input measurements then drive the UCSD 3D tomography code to produce 3D maps of the helio-sphere. with a 3-hour cadence. Fig. 2 is an example cut of the model through the ecliptic plane, which shows clear, logarithmic (Parker) spiral structures. Since the Sun is rotating and the IPS-UCSD model assumes kinematic motion, these spirals will inevitably emerge as persistent features. There is also a transient feature of higher density visible in the ecliptic cut at a longitude of approximately 45 ◦. It is this combination of a persistent background heliosphere and transient features of higher density which makes IPS-UCSD measurements a realistic model of the heliosphere. We employ the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstruction in our effort to model delays due to the heliosphere variations in the MPTA DR2 dataset as follows. Heliospheric densities are determined along the LOS based on the pulsar’s observing epoch by using the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography closest to that epoch (almost always within 

±3 hours). The densities along the pulsar-Earth LOS are then inte-grated to calculate the total column density due to heliosphere (hereby called DM IPS ), for every pulsar observation. A code has been devel-oped to perform the integration of densities to estimate the DM due to the heliosphere using the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography model 8.The IPS-UCSD 3D tomography measurements contain outliers that are affected by radio frequency interference (RFI) or coronal mass ejections. Radio frequency interference can lead to higher mod-ulation indices because of its time-variable behaviour, which in turn affects the modelled electron density. Coronal mass ejections, on the other hand, are unlikely to be modelled well enough to be predictive for our pulsar observations because they are spatially compact and short-lived. The outlying data points were identified by examining the error bars at each epoch, where we define the error bar as the standard deviation of density variations on the same pulsar-Earth LOS within 

±12 hours. We exclude an epoch if its error bar exceeds 15 times the  

> 8

The code will be shared upon request made to the corresponding author MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026) IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 7  

> Figure 3. Predicted heliospheric DM using the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography model for the PSR J1909 −3744; Removal of outliers from IPS data and replacement of outliers by interpolating the good IPS data points in the density domain using spline interpolation. The x-axis shows MJD, the left y-axis shows DM. Orange and red points represent good and bad IPS-derived heliospheric delays data points, respectively. The blue line represents the DM derived from the spherically symmetric heliosphere model, while the green line represents the interpolated DM values used in this work. The gray strips represent when the pulsar is within the 40 ◦of the Sun, leading to an increased heliospheric DM contribution.

standard deviation of all error bars, and if DM IPS exceeds 3 times the prediction from the PTA data using the “SW mean + SW GP ” model. These thresholds were chosen empirically to retain the bulk of the 

DM IPS values while removing extreme outliers. To replace excluded epochs we perform a spline interpolation of the electron density values for the retained epochs (computing n1 AU e using eq. 3). We apply the spline interpolation scheme to the n1 AU e time series so that it preserves the long-term temporal structure of the retained data. The DM IPS measured from the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere re-constructions accounts for contributions up to 3 AU. However, the relative contribution to heliosphere DM beyond 3 AU can be signifi-cant for the LOS at larger solar elongations. To avoid spurious annual variations arising from this missing heliospheric contributions (be-yond 3 AU), we add a model for the DM beyond 3 AU along the pulsar-Earth LOS. This extra DM from beyond 3 AU is computed using a combination of the DM IPS and a spherically symmetric he-liosphere model (similar to the approach taken by Kumar et al. 2022). Concretely, we keep the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstruction inside 3 AU and model the DM from 3 AU to the pulsar with a time-varying spherically symmetric heliosphere that uses n1 AU e derived from the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstructions. The procedure comprises two steps: (i) Estimate a time-varying spherically symmetric heliosphere from the maximum likelihood realisation of “SW mean + SW GP ”from the MPTA DR2 noise analysis. Compute the excess DM from 3 AU to the pulsar as the difference between this spher-ically symmetric model and the DM obtained by integrating that same model only to 3 AU. Add that excess DM to the 

DM IPS to form an updated DM IPS , known as DM IPS ,updated .(ii) Step 1 produces a composite heliosphere model combin-ing the IPS-UCSD 3D reconstruction with the spheri-cally symmetric heliosphere inferred from the MPTA DR2 maximum-likelihood “SW mean + SW GP ” realisation. Here we want an overall heliosphere that retains the IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed heliospheric densities but enforces a spherically symmetric for heliosphere DM beyond 3 AU to pulsar. So, from the updated DM IPS ,updated , compute the time-varying n1 AU e us-ing eq. 3. Smooth this n1 AU e with a spline model to capture only the long-term variation, then use the smoothed n1 AU e to calculate the excess DM from 3 AU to the pulsar, relative to the spherically symmetric model. Add this smoothed excess DM to the original DM IPS , known as DM IPS ,final .In summary, we use a time-varying spherically symmetric helio-sphere model to add any DM due to heliosphere beyond 3 AU, but we base n1 AU e for time-varying spherically symmetric heliosphere model on the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstructions. This two-step procedure reduces the excess power at the 1 yr −1 frequency. We denote this DM IPS ,final as “SW IPS ”. We also implement a hybrid model that uses “SW IPS ” together with the “SW GP ” component to absorb any remaining unmodelled heliospheric delays signal, which may be detectable in the pulsar data. This model is referred as “SW IPS + SW GP ”. 

2.4 Simulation of mock Pulsar Timing Array datasets 

In this work, we also tested how the heliospheric dispersive de-lays may affect the measured spatial-correlations among pulsar pairs through simulated timing data sets. For simulations, we use the “SW IPS ” as a realistic representation of heliospheric delays. We used the libstempo (Vallisneri 2020) package, a python wrapper for 

tempo2 , which includes routines for simulation of noise processes in ToAs to generate mock PTA datasets. We produced 3 sets of simulations to test different aspects of the effect of heliosphere delays modelling on PTAs: (i) Simulation 1: The first simulation involves generating ToAs with no stochastic red noise signals and no white noise, using the idealtoas function in libstempo , exactly matching the original MPTA DR2 MJDs and observed radio frequencies. We then inject heliospheric delays derived from the IPS-UCSD model, finally adding Gaussian white noise with a standard deviation of 100 ns with EFAC set to 1. (ii) Simulation 2: We take the ToAs with IPS-UCSD 3D helio-sphere reconstructions from Simulation 1 and inject a GWB signal using the creategwb function in libstempo as de-scribed in Chamberlin et al. (2015). The GWB signal is injected as a common red noise signal as predicted by Phinney (2001). The injected GWB signal has a PSD with log 10 𝐴 = −14 .7

and 𝛾 = 13 /3 (values reported in Reardon et al. 2023a), to be consistent with the current estimated level of the GWB from recent searches. We also inject DM variations as a stochastic red-spectrum GP which is associated to the stochastic inter-stellar DM variations. This DM variation is assumed to have a power-law PSD as described in Eq. 6 with an additional function in Eq. 7b. This stochastic interstellar DM variation is denoted as DM GP with the spectral index ( 𝛾 DM GP ) fixed at 

8/3, as expected for a Kolmogorov turbulence spectrum (see, e.g., Foster & Cordes 1990; Lorimer & Kramer 2004). The amplitudes of the power-law describing DM GP are randomly drawn from a normal distribution with mean and standard devi-ation derived from the sample of the interstellar DM variations power-law amplitudes reported in the MPTA DR2. (iii) Simulation 3: The third simulation creates a PTA containing all pulsars in MPTA DR2 with ecliptic latitude, |ELAT | < 16 ◦

and a 13-years time baseline 9 using multi-frequency observa-tions with the same frequency range as the original MPTA   

> 9The facility for IPS observations was upgraded in 2010 with a newly de-veloped UHF radio telescope for IPS observations (Tokumaru et al. 2011); therefore we use the timespan 2010–2023 for the simulation. MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# 8 Mishra et al. 

DR2. heliospheric delays are injected based on the IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed model with white-noise level set to 100 ns, and setting EFAC=1. Note that in all of the above 3 simulations, we fix all the pulsar binary parameters except the period of the binary for the pulsars using the binary model. This was done to prevent divergences in the timing model due to non-linear fitting effects introduced by the simulated signals. In addition, to ensure the reproducibility of the simulated dataset, we simulated signals such as DM variations, white noise, and GWB using unique seed values. The aim of simulations 1 and 2 are to characterise systematic effects when the heliospheric delays are not properly modelled and to show how this affects the recovered CRN parameters and spatial correlation of common signals using the optimal statistic. Simulation 3 focuses on understanding the PSD of the stochastic components of the heliospheric delay: we use the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography reconstructed heliosphere as a realistic example of the heliospheric variations and recover SW GP 

with a free-spectrum model to examine how the power is constrained at each Fourier frequency. To model heliospheric delays in the above cases, we use enter-prise routines and adopt the SW mean + SW GP model. We assume Fourier frequencies 1 / T span , 2 / T span , 3 / T span , . . . 120 / T span (same number of components used in the simulation and the MPTA DR2) for the modelling, whereas the default enterprise heliospheric de-lays model uses frequency components equally spaced in logarithm space. To model the interstellar DM variations we use the DM GP 

model, with eq. 6 as the PSD definition and the additional function given in Eq. 7b. The Fourier-frequency grid for DM GP is the same as for SW GP . We also consider a DM free case, where a free spectrum is used to fit the noise at Fourier frequencies 1 / T yr , 2 / T yr ,. . . , 10 / Tyr for modelling. For the GWB, the Fourier frequenices are chosen 1 / T span , 2 / T span , 3 / T span , . . . 30 / T span .

3 RESULTS 

We present the results of directly using IPS-UCSD derived 3D helio-spheric delays in the search for a CRN on MPTA DR2 and examine its impact on various noise parameters and recovered spatial correla-tions. Building on the noise processes established in MPTA DR2, we perform the uncorrelated CRN search using 3 different heliosphere models: a) “SW mean +SW GP ”, b) “SW IPS ”, and c) “SW IPS +SW GP ”. For the “SW IPS ” model, we first removed the outliers from the 

DM IPS . Fig. 3 shows this removal of outliers for PSR J1909 −3744. Applying this technique to all 83 MSPs in MPTA DR2 typically yields 2-4 outliers per pulsar. We then added excess DM due to helio-spheric delays in the pulsar-Earth beyond 3 AU using the correction procedure described in Section 2.3 to get DM IPS ,final .

3.1 Parameter estimation and time-domain realisation comparison of various noise processes 

Fig. 4 shows the posterior probability distributions for the param-eters describing the stochastic interstellar DM variations and the heliospheric density at 1 AU for PSR J1909 −3744 and the uncorre-lated CRN when using various heliosphere models. The power-law PSD describing the stochastic interstellar DM variations is shal-lower for PSR J1909 −3744 when using the “SW IPS ” model, whereas for “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ” cases, the DM variations are steeper and nearly identical and consistent with the expecta-tion of Kolmogorov turbulence. Similarly, the inferred properties          

> Figure 4. Posterior distributions of the inferred parameters (A and 𝛾 ) of the power-law PSD describing a stochastic process. Top: the stochastic interstel-lar DM variations for the PSR J1909 −3744; Middle: the heliospheric density variations (i.e., n1 AU e) for the PSR J1909 −3744, bottom: the uncorrelated common red noise for the MPTA DR2. The teal, pink, and gold represent the case where “SW mean +SW GP ”, “SW IPS ”, and “SW IPS +SW GP ” heliosphere models are used respectively. 𝛾 = 8/3 corresponds to the Kolmogorov spec-trum due to turbulence in the interstellar medium where 𝛾 = 13/3 corresponds to gravitational wave background coming from a population of circular su-permassive black hole binaries. MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 9           

> (a) Mean heliospheric DM + stochastic heliospheric DM (b) Stochastic interstellar DM
> (c) Stochastic heliospheric DM + stochastic interstellar DM (d) Stochastic common red noise time delay
> Figure 5. Gaussian-process time-domain realisations for various noise processes for the PSR J1909 −3744. Top left: the total heliospheric DM - DM 𝑆𝑊 (i.e. DM SW mean or DM SW IPS + DM SW GP ); top right: the inferred interstellar DM variations / DM GP ; bottom left: then net DM variations with contributions from the interstellar (DM GP ) and stochastic heliospheric DM variations (DM SW GP ); bottom right: the time delays of a common process, reflective of potential GW signals. The teal, pink and gold curves show results when using the “SW mean +SW GP ", “SW IPS " and “SW IPS +SW GP " models for heliospheric delays, respectively. The corresponding 1𝜎 error regions are shown as filled areas in corresponding colours. The grey regions representing the epoch when the PSR J1909 −3744 is within 40 ◦of the Sun. For interstellar DM variations, a clear change in DM can be observed at small solar elongations (shaded grey bands).

of the power-law describing the heliospheric density at 1 AU for the “SW IPS +SW GP ” case shows a broad distribution centred around a spectral exponent of zero, and the amplitude is smaller than when using “SW mean +SW GP ”. In the latter case, the stochastic he-liospheric density variation is well constrained, supporting a loud and steeper noise. The uncorrelated CRN has a very shallow spec-tral index and high amplitude when using “SW IPS ”, whereas for the “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ” cases, the recovered noise is steeper and nearly identical. The CRN spectral index is consistent with the expectation for a GWB from SMBHBs for the noise models that include SW GP .Fig. 5 shows the time-domain realisation of various noise processes for PSR J1909 −3744. On average, delays from different heliosphere models are similar. Because PSR J1909 −3744 lies below the solar pole, the solar activity cycle is more evident: heliospheric density above/below the pole of the Sun varies more over the solar cycle, till ELAT < 25 ◦ (Tiburzi et al. 2021; Susarla et al. 2024; Waszewski et al. 2025). The heliospheric density on the equatorial plane of the Sun remains relatively stable and this can be seen in the MPTA DR2. Two pulsars PSR J1022 +1001 (ELAT = -0.06 ◦) and PSR J1730 −2304 (ELAT = 0.189 ◦) are very close to the ecliptic plane and has low heliospheric variability, i.e., no evidence of SW GP .The reconstructed DM variations are smoother when using “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ” than when using “SW IPS ”alone. With “SW IPS ” the stochastic interstellar DM variations show pronounced dips and rises near MJD ∼ 59210 and 59950, which correspond to epochs when the pulsar is very close to the Sun and heliospheric delays are expected to be larger. When examining the sum of the stochastic variations in the interstellar and the heliospheric DM for the different heliosphere −model cases, the rises and dips in the above summed DM variations occur at the same MJDs (close approaches to the Sun), indicating that the unmodelled heliospheric delays are leaking into the stochastic interstellar DM variations when using “SW IPS ” alone. The reconstructed uncorrelated CRN shown in Fig. 5 is smoother and very similar for “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ”, but ap-pears more rapidly varying when using only “SW IPS ”. This faster variation in the recovered CRN is consistent with residual high-frequency power left by subtracting the rapidly varying “SW IPS ”directly from the residuals: because “SW IPS ” contains substantial high-frequency variations, the CRN becomes shallower (as we show in Fig. 4) to accommodate the non-negligible power at frequencies up to ∼1 yr −1.We inspected the effect of using different heliospheric models on various noise process parameters. We found that for some pul-sars close to the ecliptic plane, noise processes are changing when using the “SW GP ” model, because of the same high-frequency struc-ture that we identified for PSR J1909 −3744 and in the recovered common-spectrum process. For PSR J1811 −2405 (ELAT = -0.67 ◦), PSR J1614 −2230 (ELAT = -1.26 ◦), PSR J1643 −1224 (ELAT = 9.78 ◦), and PSR J1545 −4550 (ELAT = -25.29 ◦), DM GP becomes shallower when using the IPS model, similar to the PSR J1909 −3744. For PSR J1811 −2405 (ELAT = -0.67 ◦), PSR J1327 −0755 (ELAT = 1.2 ◦), and PSR J1614 −2230 (ELAT = -1.26 ◦), the SW GP also changes. For the remaining pulsars, the various noise parameters posteriors (including white noise parameters) overlap with those of the ‘ ‘SW mean + SW GP ” model. Although the “SW IPS ” model gives the same result in these pulsars, our common noise analysis shows that the errors can appear as a common process. For this reason, we would not recommend using this “SW IPS ” model as low-amplitude  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# 10 Mishra et al. 

(a) Hellings-Downs correlations 

(b) Dipole correlations 

(c) Monopole correlations 

Figure 6. Histogram of the strength of spatial correlations assuming Hellings-Downs, dipole and monopole ORFs for the MPTA DR2, computed while utilising different heliosphere models. The S/N values indicate the signal-to-noise ratio strength of the recovered correlations for each heliosphere model. The teal, pink and gold curves show results for the “SW mean +SW GP ”, “SW IPS ”and “SW IPS +SW GP ” heliosphere model, respectively. 

errors might not affect single pulsar analyses, but appear in the more sensitive common-noise search. 

3.2 Spatial correlations 

3.2.1 MPTA DR2 

Fig.6 shows histograms of the measured correlation strengths ob-tained using different heliosphere models, computed with the OS. For each trial we draw a random sample from the posterior distribu-tion and use the corresponding noise-parameter values, following a similar approach to Vigeland et al. (2018); Miles et al. (2024b) . For each parameter combination we compute the OS signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) assuming ORFs corresponding to HD, dipole and monopole correlations. The HD distribution for “SW mean +SW GP ” exhibits a tail extending to ∼3 𝜎 as shown in Fig. 6a, consistent with Miles et al. (2024b). The HD S/N is substantially reduced when using “SW IPS ” alone, whereas “SW IPS +SW GP ” yields the S/N distribution with a spread similar 

(a) Injected: IPS, Modelled: CRN 

(b) Injected: DM GP +IPS+GWB, Modelled:DM GP +SW mean +SW GP +CRN 

Figure 7. Measured inter-pulsar spatial correlations induced by the inferred common red noise component in the simulated PTA mock dataset. Top: inter-pulsar correlation obtained using simulation 1 where in the simulated PTA only heliospheric delays present (based on IPS-UCSD 3D tomography). These delays are modelled as a uncorrelated common red noise. Bottom: inter-pulsar correlation obtained using simulation 2 where in the simulated PTA along with heliospheric delays (IPS-UCSD 3D tomography as a reality), stochastic interstellar DM variations and GWB are also present. The GWB is modelled as a uncorrelated common red noise. Different colours represent the cases where the uncorrelated common red noise has been searched while ignoring the ToAs within certain solar elongation ( 𝜃 𝑡𝑜𝑎 ). 

to “SW mean +SW GP ”. This feature is attributable to the recovered uncorrelated CRN having a very shallow spectrum when “SW IPS ” is used without the GP component. Fig. 6b shows the dipole S/N distributions which are similar across all three heliosphere models, with “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ” showing slightly broader distributions. The monopole results are noteworthy as plotted in Fig. 6c: “SW IPS ” produces more positive monopole S/N values compared with “SW mean +SW GP ” and “SW IPS +SW GP ”, which tend toward neg-ative (anti-correlated) values. A negative monopole S/N indicates that a larger fraction of pulsar pairs exhibit anti-correlation. 

3.2.2 Simulated Data 

We conducted analyses of simulated MPTA-like mock datasets to assess the impact of the current PTA spherically symmetric time varying heliosphere model in ideal scenarios (while using IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed heliosphere). The results of the simulated datasets described in Section 2.4 are summarised below. (i) Simulation 1: This dataset contains IPS and white noise -efac. We model uncorrelated CRN and fixing white noise to injected value, i.e., EFAC = 1, to avoid any leakage of mis-specification of heliosphere delay in white noise parameter. We, then utilise the OS code to measure the inter-pulsar spa-tial correlations. Separate CRN searches were performed on 

MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026) IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 11 

Figure 8. Recovered spectral index of the stochastic interstellar DM variations for various pulsars as a function of ecliptic latitude (ELAT), where the injected value is 8/3 (Kolmogorov turbulence) using the simulation 2 mock PTA dataset. Different colours show the results from different noise models. For all these cases, the injected signals for the simulation were the stochastic interstellar DM variations, white noise, GWB, and IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed heliosphere model. 

Figure 9. Recovered common PSD of the stochastic heliospheric density variations ( n1 AU e ) assuming a free spectrum rather than a power law from simulation 3 mock PTA dataset. The simulated dataset contains heliospehric delays based on the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography heliosphere model but modelled using the “SW mean +SW GP ” model. The y-axis shows the power in the log-scale whereas the x axis shows the Fourier components of the stochastic variation in the log-scale. The green curve shows the injected n1 AU e . Orange, blue and magenta represent the cases when using various Fourier components to model the stochastic heliospheric density variations, which corresponds to 10, 30, and 100 components respectively. The results demonstrate clear deviations from a simple power-law model, evident in the variable distribution of power across frequency bins. The recovered power depends on the number of frequency components modelled, particularly when frequencies > 1 yr −1 are not modelled. 

subsets of the simulation, with each subset formed by remov-ing ToAs with solar elongation 𝜃 toa (separation angle from the Sun) within cutoffs {0◦, 3◦, 5◦, 10 ◦, 15 ◦, 25 ◦ }. In all subsets, the recovered uncorrelated CRN had a shallow spectral index (ranging 𝛾 CRN ∼ 0.6–1.8). We adopted the mean spectral in-dex and re-ran the CRN search with a fixed 𝛾 CRN = 1.35 to ensure a consistent amplitude and raw spatial correlation com-parison. After this noise analysis, the OS was used to compute inter-pulsar correlations and to normalise the autocovariances to be at the same as the measured common-red-noise ampli-

MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026) 12 Mishra et al. 

tude level. shown in Fig.7a. As the masking cutoff increases, the heliosphere-induced correlation decreases and the overall correlation moves towards zero; the correlation is dominated by pulsars that approach close to the Sun. (ii) Simulation 2: This dataset contains IPS, DM GP , a GWB, and white noise - efac. The interstellar DM variations were mod-elled with DM GP model together with CRN, while the he-liosphere was intentionally misspecified in three ways: (i) no heliosphere model, (ii) “SW mean +SW GP ”, and (iii) DM free (see Section 2.4), along with the ideal case “SW IPS ” where we have subtracted the injected IPS. Fig. 7b shows that when the helio-spheric delays are modelled using the “SW mean +SW GP ” model, the recovered GWB correlation matches the injected signal even without masking ToAs within given solar-elongation cutoffs. Fig. 8 presents recovered spectral indices ( 𝛾 DM GP )of the power-law describing the stochastic interstellar DM variations: with a badly specified heliosphere model, the re-covered 𝛾 DM GP shows an ecliptic-angle dependence (pulsars near the Sun display artificially shallow spectra), whereas the “SW mean +SW GP ” model recovers the injected interstellar DM variation spectral index. Across all pulsars, the recovered white noise parameter - EFAC remain within 1 𝜎 of the injected val-ues, for various misspecifications of the heliospheric delays. (iii) Simulation 3: This dataset spans ∼13-years and contains IPS-UCSD 3D reconsturcted heliospheric delays and white noise - EFAC. The heliospheric delays are modelled as a common noise process using “SW mean +SW GP ” with a free-spectrum pa-rameterisation (power fitted independently in each frequency bin) PSD along with white noise - EFAC and ECORR. The ECORR has been modelled to account for the fact that the free spectrum model does not go to infinite Fourier frequencies but the IPS-UCSD injected heliospheric delay does, effectively, so we needed a model for the high-Fourier frequencies. We compare models with 10, 30 and 100 Fourier frequency com-ponents. Fig. 9 displays the recovered free spectrum of n1 AU e :the spectrum changes notably at low Fourier frequencies be-tween the different models, and the shape of the spectrum depends on the number of components and on whether bins sample frequencies above or below 1 yr −1 (further discussed in Section 4). Using Eq. 3 to compute n1 AU e from the 13-year DM 𝐼 𝑃𝑆, 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 series and taking its power spectrum, the recov-ered spectrum agrees with the free-spectrum fit for frequencies > 1 yr −1. The white-noise parameters are well recovered us-ing a sufficiently high number of frequency components. We show that this number is approximately 100 for our simu-lated 13-year data set. When too few components are used, the white-noise parameters for low ecliptic latitude pulsars (|𝐸 𝐿 𝐴𝑇 | < 6◦) are higher than injected. 

4 DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY 

We tested whether the IPS-based heliosphere reconstruction can be directly used to model the variable heliosphere in PTA datasets. We also tested the performance of current PTA noise models under sim-ulated datasets where the IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere reconstruction was injected as a realistic representation of the heliosphere. We found that for the MPTA DR2 dataset: (i) The IPS-UCSD based 3D heliospheric reconstruction does not provide an improved model for heliospheric delays in PTA analyses. The recovered noise parameters are altered by the IPS-derived heliosphere, including (a) divergence of the spec-tral slope of the interstellar DM variations away from the expected 8/3 value (see Figs. 4), and (b) a much shallower spectral slope for the common red noise as shown in Figs. 4, 5. The change in noise model parameters are more pronounced for some MPTA pulsars within |𝐸 𝐿 𝐴𝑇 | < 16 ◦, which demon-strates that these pulsars show strong sensitivity to heliospheric delays. (ii) Related to point (b) above, because the IPS-UCSD-based 3D heliosphere reconstructions alter the spectral properties of the recovered common red noise, they also reduce the recovered S/N of HD correlations. This reduction arises because of the additional short timescale structure induced in the common red noise which originates from misspecification of heliospheric delays, and is unrelated to the sought-after GW signal (see Fig. 6). (iii) In the absence of any other noise source in the PTA dataset, misspecification of heliospheric delays can affect the recov-ered spatial correlations. This was demonstrated by measuring the spatial correlation induced by the IPS-UCSD 3D recon-structed heliosphere, shown in Fig. 7a. However, the corre-lation changes again when other noise sources (specifically a DM Gaussian process) are present and modelled in the PTA, and we can recover the injected GWB correlation as shown in Fig. 7b. (iv) Assuming the MPTA noise models, removing ToAs within certain separation angles from the Sun does not significantly alter the recovered correlations. This suggests that for MPTA-like datasets, excising ToAs recorded at low solar elongation is not an effective strategy to mitigate heliospheric delays. (v) Simulations show that misspecification of the heliosphere model in the presence of other noise processes in PTA datasets biases the parameters of these noise models for low ecliptic latitude pulsars, specifically the interstellar DM variations, as shown in Fig. 8. However, the recovered spectral properties of the GWB are consistent with the injected values. (vi) Using a time −variable spherically symmetric model (“SW mean 

+ SW GP ”) is adequate to model the heliospheric delays in the MPTA dataset along with the GWB and interstellar DM variations. (vii) It is important to model the high-frequency components of heliospheric delays variations when using the Fourier domain kernel, as shown in Fig. 9. Only modelling low-frequency Fourier components leads to gross mis-estimation of the time-variable heliosphere properties. The recovered white noise pa-rameters also get affected when using low-frequncey Fourier components for low-ecliptic pulsar, |𝐸 𝐿 𝐴𝑇 | < 6◦. Further-more, assuming the IPS-UCSD derived 3D reconstruction of the heliosphere is reasonably close to reality, the structure of the power spectrum of heliospheric density variations deviates strongly from a power law under the “SW mean +SW GP ” model. We have tested whether the IPS-based derived heliosphere, recon-structed using UCSD 3D tomography, can be used to model the helio-spheric delays when searching for GWB in MPTA DR2. IPS-derived heliospheric models are currently highly competitive due to their ability to construct plausible three-dimensional models of the time-varying heliosphere. However, directly using “SW IPS ” alters several noise parameters and the uncorrelated CRN: the recovered CRN be-comes shallower, indicating leakage from IPS-derived heliospheric delays that add power at higher Fourier frequencies. The time-domain realisations show the same behaviour: interstellar DM variations and  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# IPS-informed heliospheric modelling for MPTA 13 

CRN exhibit more structure on short timescales when “SW IPS ” is used, consistent with leakage of high-frequency power into other noise sources. When using “SW mean +SW GP ” or “SW IPS +SW GP ” the recovered noise is consistent, suggesting the stochastic heliospheric delays component absorbs the fast IPS variations in later and prevents contamination of other parameters. The fact that we can measure these differences, for example with PSR J1909 −3744, indicates that at least some pulsars are sensitive to errors in such heliosphere mod-els. The consequence of this is that that pulsar-based measurements of the heliospheric delays can be used to improve 3D, time-dependent models of the heliosphere. This is particularly pertinent with the ad-vent of low-frequency instruments such as LOFAR, NENUFAR, and the SKA-Low in PTA experiments, which will provide even higher-precision integrated heliospheric density estimates, and the ongoing efforts to improve space weather models for e.g. coronal mass ejec-tion forecasting. We also found that the optimal statistic amplitudes for various ORFs (HD, dipole, and monopole) can be biased when the he-liosphere model is misspecified: leaked IPS power can dominate the recovered signal and reduce genuine GWB-induced correlations. “SW IPS ” alone does not adequately model the heliosphere because its fast variations are absorbed into the uncorrelated CRN, reducing the HD S/N. Simulations show that in the absence of advanced noise models, masking ToAs within certain solar-elongation cutoffs reduces the impact of the heliospheric delays, particularly for pulsar pairs with members close to the ecliptic plane. Notably, although a misspeci-fied heliosphere model affects the recovery of other noise parame-ters, the “SW mean +SW GP ” model is able to model the IPS-derived heliospheric delays and yields reasonable recovery of other noise parameters without the need to excise ToAs. We also show that to account for the full heliospheric delays signal one must model a high number of Fourier-frequency components to capture the fast variations. The power in the SW GP model depends on the number of frequency components used, which may point to a limitation of Fourier-domain analyses that treat each Fourier frequency bin as independent (Crisostomi et al. 2025). Time-domain models of the heliosphere may be more appropriate (Crisostomi et al. 2025; Hazboun et al. 2025) and could be further tested against the IPS-UCSD 3D reconstructed derived heliosphere in future work. The current heliosphere model employed by many PTAs (“SW mean +SW GP ”) is adequate for GWB searches in MPTA L-band datasets. More work is needed to address the inclusion of low radio frequencies in PTA datasets where heliospheric delays are a domi-nant feature (e.g. in LOFAR and future SKA-low pulsar timing data Shannon et al. 2025). Our work also shows that pulsar timing is a sensitive probe of the heliospheric structure. Our observations show that current state-of-the-art IPS models are not yet adequate to fully account for heliospheric delays in pulsar timing. We anticipate that future IPS observations with SKA-low, in conjunction with precision low-frequency timing measurements of pulsars, may be used to pro-duce more accurate models of the 3D heliosphere that can be used in future L-band pulsar timing experiments (Tiburzi et al. 2025). 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Bernard V. Jackson for pro-viding the IPS-UCSD 3D tomography data. The authors also thank Dr. Valentina di Marco for her useful comments on this work. SM, DJR, MB, RMS, and ADK acknowledge support from the ARC Cen-tre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (CE170100004 and CE230100016). RMS acknowledges support through the ARC Future Fellowship FT190100155. MTM acknowledges support from the NANOGrav Collaboration’s National Science Foundation grant. The MeerKAT telescope is operated by the South African Radio Astronomy Observatory (SARAO), which is a facility of the Na-tional Research Foundation, an agency of the Department of Science and Innovation. PTUSE was developed with the support of the Aus-tralian SKA Office and Swinburne University of Technology, with financial contributions from the MeerTime collaboration members. This work used the OzSTAR national facility at Swinburne Univer-sity of Technology. OzSTAR is funded by Swinburne University of Technology and the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS). 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

All data used in this work are available courtesy of AAO Data Central (https://datacentral.org.au/) at https://doi.org/10.57891/j0vh-5g31. The data generated through IPS-UCSD 3D heliosphere recon-struction model and simulations will be made available on reasonable request to the corresponding author. 

REFERENCES     

> Agazie G., et al., 2023, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 951, L9 Aksim D., Melnikov A., Pavlov D., Kurdubov S., 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 885, 159 Allen R. C., et al., 2020, ApJS, 246, 36 Allen B., Dhurandhar S., Gupta Y., McLaughlin M., Natarajan P., Shan-non R. M., Thrane E., Vecchio A., 2023, The International Pulsar Tim-ing Array checklist for the detection of nanohertz gravitational waves (arXiv:2304.04767 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04767
> Antoniadis J., et al., 2023, Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, 678, A48 Backer D. C., Hama S., van Hook S., Foster R. S., 1993, ApJ, 404, 636 Burke-Spolaor S., et al., 2019, The Astronomy and Astrophysics Review, 27 Caballero R. N., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 5501 Chamberlin S. J., Creighton J. D., Siemens X., Demorest P., Ellis J., Price L. R., Romano J. D., 2015, Physical Review D, 91 Coles W. A., 1996, Ap&SS, 243, 87 Coles W. A., et al., 1980, Nature, 286, 239 Crisostomi M., van Haasteren R., Meyers P. M., Vallisneri M., 2025, Beyond diagonal approximations: improved covariance modeling for pulsar tim-ing array data analysis ( arXiv:2506.13866 ), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2506.13866
> Detweiler S., 1979, ApJ, 234, 1100 Di Marco V., Zic A., Miles M. T., Reardon D. J., Thrane E., Shannon R. M., 2023, ApJ, 956, 14 Di Marco V., Zic A., Shannon R. M., Thrane E., 2024, MNRAS, 532, 4026 Di Marco V., Zic A., Shannon R. M., Thrane E., Kulkarni A. D., 2025, ApJ, 990, 85 Edwards R. T., Hobbs G. B., Manchester R. N., 2006, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 372, 1549–1574 Ellis J., van Haasteren R., 2017, jellis18/PTMCMCSampler: Official Release, doi:10.5281/zenodo.1037579, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 1037579
> Ellis J. A., Vallisneri M., Taylor S. R., Baker P. T., 2019, ENTERPRISE: Enhanced Numerical Toolbox Enabling a Robust PulsaR Inference SuitE, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1912.015 Foster R. S., Backer D. C., 1990, ApJ, 361, 300 Foster R. S., Cordes J. M., 1990, ApJ, 364, 123 Gersbach K. A., Taylor S. R., Meyers P. M., Romano J. D., 2025, Physical Review D, 111 Goncharov B., et al., 2021, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 917, L19 Hazboun J. S., et al., 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 929, 39 MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)

# 14 Mishra et al. 

Hazboun J. S., et al., 2025, The NANOGrav 12.5-year Data Set: Chro-matic Noise Characterization & Mitigation with Time-Domain Kernels (arXiv:2511.22597 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.22597 

Hellings R. W., Downs G. S., 1983, ApJ, 265, L39 Hewish A., Scott P. F., Wills D., 1964, Nature, 203, 1214 Hewish A., Bell S. J., Pilkington J. D. H., Scott P. F., Collins R. A., 1968, Nature, 217, 709 Hobbs G., Lyne A. G., Kramer M., Martin C. E., Jordan C., 2004, MNRAS, 353, 1311 Hobbs G. B., Edwards R. T., Manchester R. N., 2006, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 369, 655–672 Hobbs G., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 491, 5951 Iraci F., et al., 2024, Pulsar timing methods for evaluating dispersion measure time series ( arXiv:2410.22170 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2410. 22170 

Jackson B. V., Buffington A., Cota L., Odstrcil D., Bisi M. M., Fallows R., Tokumaru M., 2020, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences, 7, 76 Jian L. K., et al., 2015, Space Weather, 13, 316 Jonas J., MeerKAT Team 2016, in MeerKAT Science: On the Pathway to the SKA. p. 1, doi:10.22323/1.277.0001 Jones M. L., et al., 2017, ApJ, 841, 125 Keith M. J., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 2161 Kulkarni S. R., 2020, Dispersion measure: Confusion, Constants & Clarity (arXiv:2007.02886 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.02886 

Kulkarni A. D., Shannon R. M., Reardon D. J., Miles M. T., Bailes M., Shamohammadi M., 2024, An insight into chromatic behaviour of jit-ter in pulsars and its modelling: A case study of PSR J0437 −4715 (arXiv:2401.03660 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.03660 

Kumar P., White S. M., Stovall K., Dowell J., Taylor G. B., 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 511, 3937–3950 Lentati L., Alexander P., Hobson M. P., Taylor S., Gair J., Balan S. T., van Haasteren R., 2013, Physical Review D, 87 Lorimer D. R., Kramer M., 2004, Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy. Cambridge University Press Luo J., et al., 2021, The Astrophysical Journal, 911, 45 Madison D. R., et al., 2019, ApJ, 872, 150 Manoharan P. K., 1993, Sol. Phys., 148, 153 McComas D. J., et al., 1998, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 1 Miles M. T., et al., 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 519, 3976–3991 Miles M. T., et al., 2024a, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 536, 1467–1488 Miles M. T., et al., 2024b, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 536, 1489–1500 Niţu I. C., et al., 2024, A Gaussian-processes approach to fitting for time-variable spherical solar wind in pulsar timing data ( arXiv:2401.07917 ), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.07917 

Papitashvili N., Bilitza D., King J., 2014, in 40th COSPAR Scientific Assem-bly. pp C0.1–12–14 Parthasarathy A., et al., 2021, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 502, 407–422 Perera B. B. P., et al., 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 490, 4666–4687 Phillips J. A., Wolszczan A., 1991, ApJ, 382, L27 Phinney E. S., 2001, A Practical Theorem on Gravitational Wave Back-grounds (arXiv:astro-ph/0108028 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/ astro-ph/0108028 

Pierrard V., Lazar M., Štverák S., 2020, Sol. Phys., 295, 151 Pizzo V. J., de Koning C., Cash M., Millward G., Biesecker D. A., Puga L., Codrescu M., Odstrcil D., 2015, Space Weather, 13, 676 Polzin E. J., Breton R. P., Stappers B. W., Bhattacharyya B., Janssen G. H., Osłowski S., Roberts M. S. E., Sobey C., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 889 Reardon D. J., et al., 2023a, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 951, L6 Reardon D. J., et al., 2023b, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 951, L7 Seidelmann P. K., et al., 2007, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astron-omy, 98, 155 Shannon R. M., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 1463 Shannon R. M., et al., 2025, The SKAO Pulsar Timing Array (arXiv:2512.16163 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.16163 

Susarla S. C., et al., 2024, Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, 692, A18 Talpeanu D.-C., Poedts S., D’Huys E., Mierla M., Richardson I. G., 2022, Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, 663, A32 Tappin S. J., 1986, Planet. Space Sci., 34, 93 Tarafdar P., et al., 2022, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 39 Taylor S. R., 2021, The Nanohertz Gravitational Wave Astronomer (arXiv:2105.13270 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13270 

Taylor S. R., Baker P. T., Hazboun J. S., Simon J., Vigeland S. J., 2021, enterprise_extensions, https://github.com/nanograv/ enterprise_extensions 

The SunPy Community et al., 2020, The Astrophysical Journal, 890, 68 Tiburzi C., et al., 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 455, 4339–4350 Tiburzi C., et al., 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 487, 394–408 Tiburzi C., et al., 2021, Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, 647, A84 Tiburzi C., Jackson B., Cota L., Shaifullah G., Fallows R., Tokumaru M., Zucca P., 2023, Advances in Space Research, 72, 5287–5297 Tiburzi C., et al., 2025, Exploring Galactic plasma with pulsars in the SKA era ( arXiv:2512.16158 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.16158 

Tokumaru M., Kojima M., Fujiki K., Maruyama K., Maruyama Y., Ito H., Iju T., 2011, Radio Science, 46, RS0F02 Vallisneri M., 2020, libstempo: Python wrapper for Tempo2, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2002.017 Vigeland S. J., Islo K., Taylor S. R., Ellis J. A., 2018, Physical Review D, 98 Waszewski A., Morgan J. S., Ekers R., Johnston-Hollitt M., Cheung M. C. M., Bhat N. D. R., Chhetri R., Fu S. C., 2025, Latitudinal dependence of the solar wind during periods of high and low activity through interplanetary scintillation ( arXiv:2506.14155 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2506. 14155 

Xiong M., et al., 2023, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences, 10, 1159166 Xu H., et al., 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 075024 You X. P., et al., 2007a, MNRAS, 378, 493 You X. P., Hobbs G. B., Coles W. A., Manchester R. N., Han J. L., 2007b, ApJ, 671, 907 You X. P., Coles W. A., Hobbs G. B., Manchester R. N., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 1160 Zhang J., et al., 2020, Earth-affecting Solar Transients: A Review of Pro-gresses in Solar Cycle 24 ( arXiv:2012.06116 ), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2012.06116 

Zic A., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 516, 410 Zic A., et al., 2023, The Parkes Pulsar Timing Array Third Data Release (arXiv:2306.16230 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16230 

van Haasteren R., Levin Y., 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 428, 1147–1159 van Haasteren R., Vallisneri M., 2014, Physical Review D, 90 van Haasteren R., Levin Y., McDonald P., Lu T., 2009, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 395, 1005–1014 This paper has been typeset from a TEX/L ATEX file prepared by the author. MNRAS 000 , 1–14 (2026)