Title: The Impact of Errors in the Shape Function of Rotating Neutron Stars in the Oblate Schwarzschild Approximation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27744v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 00:23:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
## The Impact of Errors in the Shape Function of Rotating Neutron Stars in the Oblate Schwarzschild Approximation 

John Ming Ngo ,∗ Charlee Amason, and Sharon M. Morsink †

Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 

(Dated: August 31, 2026) Measurements of thermal X-ray flux emitted by neutron stars can constrain their radii and the equation of state of cold dense matter. Accurate flux modeling of rapidly rotating neutron stars requires an approximation for their oblate surface shape, usually given by a shape function. We examine the accuracy of five shape functions by comparing them against numerical relativistic stellar surfaces for seven representative equations of state over a broad range of compactness and spin. We characterize their errors in the surface radius and their derivative with respect to colatitude, test the extent of quasi-universality, and propagate these errors into the differential solid angle dΩ,a geometric factor underlying the observed flux, under the oblate Schwarzschild approximation. We find that the shape functions produce distinct error patterns associated with their forms and parameter ranges. These errors remain structured in compactness, spin, and colatitude. Simple polynomial corrections substantially reduce the radius errors of several shape functions, with most corrected errors within approximately 0.5% . We show that errors in dΩ may be understood as coming from an area contribution, which scales with twice the relative radius error, and a projection contribution controlled primarily by the error in the surface derivative. The projection contribution grows towards the limb, where small surface errors can produce much larger local errors in dΩ. We provide a set of guidelines for the construction of improved quasi-universal shape functions that can be used in future radius estimation efforts. Our recommendations include that both the shape and its derivative be modeled accurately, that more accurate predictions of the polar radius be developed, and that the shape function be calibrated over the same compactness-spin range that is to be tested. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The cores of neutron stars are both cold and dense, with densities that are many times larger than nuclear saturation, and thermal energies much lower than the Fermi energy. This range of physical conditions is not well constrained by nuclear theory or laboratory exper-iments. A large range of equations of state (EOS) for cold, dense matter have been proposed [1]. Each pro-posed EOS is mapped to a different curve of possible neutron star masses and radii [2] using the equations of relativistic stellar structure. As a result, observations of the masses and radii of many neutron stars can be used to constrain the EOS of cold, dense matter [3, 4]. Observations of thermal X-rays emitted from the sur-faces of neutron stars, either pulsed or unpulsed, provide a method for estimating the masses and radii of neutron stars and the nuclear EOS. The X-rays travel from the surface of the neutron star to the telescope on paths that are curved by the star’s gravitational field. The gravita-tional bending of the light is related to the compactness ratio of the neutron star, M/R eq , where M is the mass, and Req is the equatorial radius. (We use units where 

G = c = 1 .) Doppler effects scale as v ∼ 2πνR eq , where 

ν is the star’s spin frequency. These relativistic effects can be used to constrain the neutron star’s mass and equatorial radius [5]. In a few cases such as with binary   

> ∗mjngo@ualberta.ca
> †morsink@ualberta.ca

systems, observations of the radio pulsations provide an independent, precise measurement of the mass [6], allow-ing for stronger constraints on the radius. Observations of unpulsed X-ray emission from the en-tire surface of the neutron star by X-ray telescopes such as Chandra and XMM-Newton can be used to determine the flux and effective temperature of the emission, given an atmosphere model [7]. Combining this spectral data with an accurate distance leads to an estimate of the lu-minosity radius, RL = R/ p1 − 2M/R , which leads to fairly broad constraints [8] on the EOS due to the lack of an independent mass measurement. Extra uncertainties are introduced if the neutron star is rotating [9] and/or has undetected surface inhomogeneities [10], which could lead to biased inferences of the radius. A recent analysis [11] of Chandra observations of the quiescent low-mass X-ray binary neutron star 47 Tuc X7 took into account the unknown rotation of this star and possible surface anisotropies and found a large range of radii correspond-ing to a precision of approximately 20%. In the case of X-ray burst sources, it has been shown [12, 13] that the inclusion of rotation introduces a large uncertainty to the EOS constraints. It is expected that NewAthena (with a launch date in the 2030s) will have a large enough ef-fective area to provide stronger constraints [14] on the EOS using observations of unpulsed surface X-ray emis-sion from many neutron stars. Pulse-profile modeling [5, 15] is used to infer the masses and radii of rotating X-ray pulsars using spectral-timing data collected by telescopes such as the Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER) [16]. NICER observations have been used to provide estimates of the arXiv:2608.27744v1 [astro-ph.HE] 27 Aug 2026 2masses and radii of a few rotation-powered pulsars, in-cluding PSR J0030+0451 [17–19], PSR J0740+6620 [20– 23], PSR J1231-1411 [24], PSR J0437-4715 [25, 26], and PSR J0614-3329 [27]. These pulsars have moderate spin frequencies that range from 174 to 347 Hz. Planned ob-servatories, such as the enhanced X-ray Timing and Po-larimetry (eXTP) telescope [28], will be launched in the 2030s and will extend these types of measurements to more neutron stars, including the more rapidly rotating (300 - 600 Hz) accretion-powered millisecond-period X-ray pulsars (AMXPs). Since many neutron stars that emit X-rays from their surface are rotating, it is important to investigate how rotation affects the computation of the detected flux. In particular, the photon geodesics will be altered by the gravitational field of a rotating object, compared to the photon geodesics computed in the spherically symmet-ric Schwarzschild metric appropriate for a non-rotating neutron star. Early work [29, 30] modeled these effects by embedding a spherical surface in the metric of a Kerr black hole. However, the surface of a rotating neutron star is not spherically symmetric, and the Kerr metric is only a good description asymptotically far from a rotat-ing neutron star. A numerical computation making use of the correct oblate shape and metric arising from the rel-ativistic stellar structure equations [31] showed that the most important effect on pulse profiles is the oblate shape of the rotating star, and that the choice of metric only adds small corrections. This motivated the construc-tion of the oblate Schwarzschild (OS) approximation [32], where an oblate surface is embedded in the Schwarzschild metric, and Doppler effects are added using the same methods introduced in the Schwarzschild plus Doppler (SD) [33, 34] approximation. Although the deviations from a spherical shape are small, the initial conditions for angles at which photons can be emitted with respect to the surface are quite sensitive to the shape. In the case of the neutron stars with moderate spins near 200 Hz observed by NICER, it has been shown [15] that the OS approximation should be used in pulse-profile model-ing of NICER data. Further calculations [35, 36] for more rapidly rotating neutron stars with spin frequencies faster than 600 Hz have shown that the OS formalism contin-ues to provide an accurate approximation. However, an-other calculation of geodesics in spacetimes with differing quadrupole moments [37] has illustrated that small errors are introduced by using the Schwarzschild metric, so this merits a more detailed analysis elsewhere. The OS approximation is computationally inexpensive because the calculation of geodesics in the Schwarzschild metric is possible through a simple integral [38]. In this approximation, the oblate shape is described by the stel-lar surface, expressed as a radius R(θ) as a function of colatitude. This surface can be computed directly with a relativistic rotating-stellar-structure code, but doing so requires choosing a particular EOS. Shape functions are introduced to avoid making the surface calculation EOS-specific. They replace the tabulated surface with an ap-proximate relation for the stellar shape dependent on two dimensionless parameters: the compactness, ζ,

ζ = MReq 

(1) and the spin parameter, ϵ, defined by 

ϵ = Ω2R3eq 

M . (2) The usefulness of this approach depends on an assump-tion of quasi-universality: after the surface is expressed in terms of these dimensionless quantities, the remaining dependence on the EOS should be minimal. If this as-sumption were exact, different shape functions fitted to different EOS samples would reproduce the same surface for the same (θ, ζ, ϵ ). In practice, several shape func-tions have been introduced [32, 39–42], and they make different assumptions about the colatitude dependence, the dimensionless-parameter dependence, and the EOS set used for calibration. These differences lead to dis-agreements between their predicted surfaces. For any particular EOS, there may also be a deviation from the quasi-universal shape captured by a given fit. Until now, there has never been a detailed analysis of how accurate a shape function needs to be in order to provide an accurate prediction of the observed flux. The purpose of this paper is to provide a careful study of the systematic errors in the observed flux introduced by errors in the shape function. If a small surface element, 

dS , on the star emits light, the observed flux, dF , can be written schematically as 

dF = Υ dΩ, (3) where dΩ is the solid angle subtended by the surface, and 

Υ is a function that includes the specific intensity of the atmosphere, redshift, Doppler, and Lorentz factors, and the light travel times of photons emitted from different parts of the star. Errors in the oblate shape of the star induce errors in the observed solid angle of an area ele-ment, leading to a fractional error in the observed flux, 

∆( dF )/dF ,

∆( dF )

dF = ∆( dΩ) 

dΩ + ∆(Υ) Υ , (4) where ∆ is the error in a quantity. The focus of this paper is a detailed computation of ∆( dΩ) , the error in the solid angle caused by errors in the shape function, assuming the use of the OS approximation. We note that there are other known systematic er-rors present in the OS approximation, aside from the errors in the shape function, which are encompassed in the ∆(Υ) /Υ term. Previous work [43] has shown that there are systematic errors introduced in the original [32] treatment of the redshift in the OS approximation, and provides a simple universal correction factor. A more accurate approximation [42] for the variation of the ac-celeration due to gravity on the rotating star’s surface 3has been computed. The surface gravity is a parameter required in the atmosphere models, such as in Hydrogen atmospheres [7, 44]. These Hydrogen atmosphere mod-els also have inherent assumptions (such as deep heating) that could lead to systematic errors [45–47]; however, a comparison [48] with atmospheres with extra beaming parameters showed that radius inference is not biased by small departures from a standard deeply heated Hydro-gen atmosphere. The relationship between the systematic uncertainties in the flux and the accuracy and precision of the ra-dius (and other parameters) estimated from a Bayesian analysis is complicated. Tests of Bayesian parameter es-timation codes against synthetic NICER data (see, for example [47, 49–52]) depend on the number of photons assumed to originate from the hot spot and the back-ground. It is beyond the scope of the present work to attempt a Bayesian analysis to understand the impact of the systematic errors introduced by the shape func-tion. Instead, our goal is to provide an understanding of the magnitude and dependencies of these systematic errors with the goal that they should be smaller than the statistical errors in any data set. We have a few main goals in this paper which are ad-dressed after introducing the theoretical framework and our methodology in Section II. In Section III we will ex-amine the sizes and morphologies of the errors present in all of the shape functions that have been proposed to date. In Section IV we provide the details of an er-ror propagation analysis to show how errors in the shape function lead to errors in the solid angle, a key factor in the observed flux in the OS approximation. In this sec-tion, we explicitly compute the errors in the solid angle caused by shape function errors. Finally, in Section V we provide detailed recommendations for how to construct more accurate shape functions appropriate for use with rapidly rotating neutron stars. We will not (in this pa-per) provide a new, improved shape function. Instead, we provide the tools that any research group can use to construct their own shape function.  

> II. METHODS

In this paper, we compare approximate shape functions against a reference surface computed numerically using a relativistic stellar structure code and a specified EOS. We use the Rotating Neutron Star ( RNS ) code to compute the reference surfaces. Given an EOS, a central density, and a spin frequency ν, RNS solves the Einstein field equations for an axisymmetric rotating neutron star and returns the gravitational mass M , the equatorial radius Req , and the tabulated surface RRNS (θ), which we take as the refer-ence surface. We then evaluate each shape function from the literature using the same M , Req , and spin frequency. This gives a second surface, Rsf (θ), for the same model. The mass, equatorial radius, and spin are held fixed, so the difference between Rsf (θ) and RRNS (θ) gives us the error introduced by using the shape function in place of the RNS -computed surface for the given EOS. This allows us to determine how closely each shape function obeys quasi-universality within our parameter space. We make this comparison in stages. First, we compare the radii as functions of colatitude by taking their differ-ence as the error. This shows the scale and morphology of the radial error over colatitude. Second, we compare the surface derivatives, since the derivative affects the local surface normal in the OS approximation. Third, we use our computational implementation of the OS ap-proximation, Neutron Star Schwarzschild With Oblate Rotational Deformations (NS-SWORD)[53], to compute the differential solid angle dΩ for both the RNS surface and the shape function surface and take their difference as the error. We note that with increasing compactness, more of the back of the star is visible to an observer. At 

ζ ≤ 1/3.52 , the entire back of the star is visible to an observer, and past that point, many points on the back of the star are visible from two separate directions to an observer, a phenomenon known as double imaging. For the solid-angle calculations with NS-SWORD, this has not been implemented, so we restricted the models to 

ζ ≤ 1/3.52 . This lets us compute how differences in R(θ)

and its derivative propagate into the solid angle used in the flux calculation. The rest of this section goes into greater depth about the ingredients used in these comparisons. In the fol-lowing subsections, we first review the OS geometry and the differential solid angle used in NS-SWORD. We then describe how the reference surfaces are computed with 

RNS . Then, we define the dimensionless compactness and spin parameters used throughout the analysis. We next summarize the approximate shape functions drawn from the literature and the EOS sample used to test them.  

> A. Oblate Schwarzschild Approximation

The OS approximation, as illustrated by Figure 1, starts with the assumption that the Schwarzschild met-ric describes the exterior region of a rotating neutron star [32]. This is motivated by studies of the exact numerical metric [31]. The coordinate θ is the colatitude, mea-sured from the north spin axis so that the equator is at 

θ = π/ 2, and ϕ is the azimuthal angle measured around the spin axis. The surface of the star is defined by values of r = R(θ), where r is the radial coordinate used in the Schwarzschild metric and R(θ) is the shape function that defines the surface of the rotating star. The numerical computation of the surface R(θ) is reviewed in Section II B and the approximate shape functions are reviewed in Section II D. As in the spherical Schwarzschild approximation [34], a photon is emitted from an infinitesimal hot spot with co-ordinates θ and ϕ on the surface of the star and detected by the observer located at colatitude i (the inclination angle) and azimuthal angle ϕ = 0 . Spatial direction vec-4tors ˆr and ˆk point in the local radial direction of the spot and the observer, respectively. The photon is emitted into an initial spatial direction 

ˆk0, at an angle α from the local radial direction. The local azimuthal angle λ, defined around the radial direction, is defined so that λ = 0 corresponds to a photon that is initially directed towards the north spin axis. The gravitational field bends the photon’s direction through an angle ψ − α, where the bending angle ψ is defined through spherical trigonometry 

cos ψ = cos i cos θ + sin i sin θ cos ϕ. (5) The local azimuthal angle λ is defined through the spher-ical triangle relation 

cos i = cos θ cos ψ + sin θ sin ψ cos λ, (6) which follows from the coplanarity of the vectors ˆr, ˆk,and ˆk0 in the Schwarzschild metric. In our examinations of the errors introduced by the OS approximation, we consider the values of θ, ϕ, and i to be known exactly, so that ψ and λ have no error. Errors in the shape function introduce errors in the angle α, since it is defined implicitly through the integral relation 

ψ(b, R (θ)) = b

Z ∞

> R(θ)

dr r2



1 − b2

r2



1 − 2Mr

 −1/2

, (7) and the impact parameter b is defined by 

sin α = bR(θ)

s

1 − 2MR(θ) . (8) These equations describe the initially outgoing photon geodesics in the Schwarzschild metric. The full OS ap-proximation also requires an examination of initially in-going geodesics, which is discussed in more detail else-where [15, 32] and will not be repeated here. The OS approximation requires the introduction of two more angles, σ and τ (using the notation of [15]), describ-ing the oblate surface. The angle σ is the angle between the initial photon direction ˆk0 and the local normal to the surface, ˆn. The angle between the local radial and normal direction vectors is τ . These angles are related by 

cos σ = cos α cos τ + sin α sin τ cos λ, (9) and 

cos τ = (1 + q2(θ)) −1/2, (10) where the slope factor q(θ) is defined by 

q(θ) = 



1 − 2MR(θ)

−1/2 R′(θ)

R(θ) , (11) where R′(θ) is the derivative of R(θ) with respect to θ,and q(θ) is positive in the northern hemisphere and neg-ative in the southern hemisphere. As a result, errors in 

R(θ) and R′(θ) lead to errors in the angles τ and σ.In the OS approximation, the observed flux of photons with energy E emitted from a region on the star with angular extent dθ and dϕ is 

dF E = ΓD

(1 + z)3 I′(E′, σ ′)dΩ, (12) where the energy of the emitted photon is E′ = (1 + z)E

[43], Γ and D are the Lorentz and Doppler factors [15], 

I′(E′, σ ′) is the specific intensity in the local inertial frame momentarily co-moving with the surface of the star, and the differential solid angle dΩ is defined by [15, 32] 

dΩ = R2(θ) sin θ dθ dϕ 

cos τ D 2 × cos σ × 1(1 − 2MR(θ) )

∂ cos α∂ cos ψ R

.

(13) We split the differential solid angle in equation (13) into three terms. The first term is the surface area of a differ-ential area element divided by the square of the distance 

D to the star, where the cos τ term is due to the area element of an oblate surface being larger than that of a spherical surface. The second term, cos σ, is the oblate projection factor, so that light emitted normal to the sur-face leads to a larger subtended solid angle. The third term encompasses the gravitational self-lensing of light emitted at R(θ) in the Schwarzschild spacetime. In this paper, we compute the errors in the differential solid angle due to errors in the shape function and its derivatives. The prefactor Υ = ΓD 

> (1+ z)3

I′(E′, σ ′) also has errors introduced by errors in the shape function. These errors include errors in the redshift term, which has been examined carefully elsewhere [43]. We defer a study of errors in the special relativistic prefactors and the beam-ing pattern of the specific intensity to future work. The specific form of the error in the differential solid angle will be derived in Section IV A.  

> B. Computation of the Shape of a Rotating Star

The shape of a rotating star can be computed by nu-merically calculating the relativistic equations of stellar structure for a rigidly rotating neutron star, given an EOS. The metric for a stationary, axisymmetric space-time is given by [54] 

ds 2 = −e2Φ dt 2 + ¯ r2 sin 2 θB 2e−2Φ (dϕ − ωdt )2

+e2η−2Φ  d¯r2 + ¯ r2dθ 2 , (14) where the 4 metric functions Φ, B, ω, and η depend only on the coordinates ¯r and θ. In the limit of zero rota-tion, this metric approaches the isotropic Schwarzschild metric, and ¯r approaches the isotropic radial coordinate 5                       

> FIG. 1. Diagram illustrating the oblate Schwarzschild (OS) geometry. A photon leaves the neutron star surface along ˆk0
> and reaches the distant observer along ˆkafter bending by an angle ψ, where cos ψ= ˆk·ˆr. At the emission point, ˆris the local radial direction and ˆnis the local surface normal. The angles α,σ,τ,i,θ, and ϕare defined in the text. This figure illustrates the notation used throughout the paper. Note that the observer has been placed in the equatorial plane ( i= 90 ◦)to simplify the drawing.

[55]. The circumferential radius r (with the property that a circle with radius r has a circumference of 2πr )used in the OS approximation is defined by r = ¯ rBe −Φ.Far from the star, the metric potential Φ approaches the Newtonian gravitational potential. The metric potential 

ω encodes the dragging of inertial frames. Given an EOS, the Einstein field equations for the met-ric (14) can be solved numerically using one of many com-puter codes such as Lorene [56] or RNS [57], which have been numerically compared with each other [58] to ver-ify their accuracy. We make use of an implementation of 

RNS [59]. The RNS code is based on a Green’s function method [60, 61] and described in more detail elsewhere [42]. Since we aim to model old, cold neutron stars, we restrict our computations to rigidly rotating neutron stars. The oblate surface of the star is found by solving for the sur-face of zero specific enthalpy. The details of the definition of the specific enthalpy and the methods used to solve for the surface are the same as detailed in the paper [42]. In particular, first the equation for the surface in the ¯r co-ordinate is found, and then it is transformed to the form 

R(θ), which gives the value of the circumferential radial coordinate at each value of colatitude on the surface of the rotating star. The RNS code computes the star’s properties using a grid based on the cosine of the colatitude, μ = cos θ, and a compactified radial coordinate, s [61]. Both coordinates 

μ and s range from 0 to 1, and are divided into MDIV μ di-visions and SDIV s divisions. We compiled RNS with two separate resolutions for different sections of the analy-sis. For analyzing the errors in radius, derivative of the radius, and the differential solid angle, we utilized a com-putational grid resolution of MDIV ×SDIV = 261 × 2081 .A larger SDIV was necessary to minimize noise in the derivative of the radius below the order of magnitude of the errors shown in this paper. For the universality anal-ysis, which only deals with the radial errors, we made use of a MDIV ×SDIV = 261 × 521 for speed and simplicity, as noise in the derivative of the radius does not matter in that context.  

> C. Dimensionless Parameters

The goal of an approximate shape function is to pro-vide a simple model of the θ-dependence of the oblate shape of the neutron star that does not introduce any new parameters to the Bayesian parameter estimation pro-cess. Since the spin frequency, ν, of a pulsar is normally known to high precision, while the mass M and equa-torial radius Req are already free parameters, it makes sense to use the two dimensionless parameters ζ and ϵ

defined in equations (1) and (2). In the case of neutron stars with no pulsations, the spin frequency is not known, and ϵ is a free parameter. The compactness controls the magnitude of the gravitational lensing of photons emit-ted at the equator. The spin parameter is the ratio of the centrifugal to the gravitational force at the equator in the limit of Newtonian gravity. The range for the values of ζ and ϵ can be under-stood by examining the spin and mass measurements for a sample of representative neutron stars, shown in Table I. In Table I, we list the spin frequency and mass (where available). The observational classifications are abbre-viated as: accreting millisecond X-ray pulsar (AMXP), thermonuclear X-ray burst sources (Bursts), black widow or redback (Spider), quiescent low-mass X-ray binary (qLMXB), radio pulsar (Radio), and rotation-powered pulsar (RPP). We include the lowest known mass neu-tron star, PSR J0453+1559B (assuming that it is not a white dwarf) [62]. That mass was determined through observations of its pulsar companion. The neutron star with the highest mass determined through radio timing of Shapiro delay [63, 64] is PSR J0740+6620. The pul-sar PSR J0952-0607 has a higher mass (and spin), but the mass is determined through a more model-dependent method [65]. The RPPs listed in Table I are three of the pul-sars whose masses and radii have been estimated using NICER data and include the slowest and fastest spinning RPPs observed by NICER. The two fastest neutron stars listed (with ν > 700 Hz) are not candidates for a radius estimation analysis; however, we include them to show the range of spin frequencies known at present. Based on the known values of spin and mass, appropri-ate ranges of the dimensionless parameters ζ and ϵ can be calculated, given a range of possible equatorial radii. A few illustrative values of these parameters are listed in Table II. The entries for ν = 200 Hz and M = 1 .4M⊙6                                                          

> TABLE I. Representative neutron stars spanning the observed range of mass and spin frequency. The symbol "-" indicates that there is no measured value. One-sigma error bars are shown for the masses. The spin frequencies of the non-accreting stars are typically known to much higher precision than shown in this table. Type Name M(M⊙)Spin (Hz) Reference No Pulsations PSR J0453+1559B 1.174 ±0.004 -[62] AMXP, Bursts IGR J17480-2446 -11.0 [66] RPP, Radio PSR J0437-4715 1.418 ±0.044 173.7 [67] RPP, Radio PSR J0614-3329 1.44 ±0.07 317.6 [27, 68, 69] RPP, Radio PSR J0740+6620 2.08 ±0.07 346.5 [64] AMXP, Bursts, qLMXB SAX J1808-3658 -401.0 [70] AMXP, Bursts, qLMXB Aql X-1 -550.3 [71] Bursts 4U 1730-22 -584.7 [72] AMXP, Radio, Spider PSR J1023+0038 1.65 +0 .19
> −0.16 592.4 [73] Radio, Spider PSR J0952-0607 2.35 ±0.11 707.3 [74, 75] Radio PSR J1748-2446ad -716.3 [76]

show a typical range of the dimensionless parameters suitable for modeling PSR J0437-4715, for example.                                                                                    

> TABLE II. Illustrative values of neutron star compactness ζ
> and spin parameter ϵfor typical combinations of mass, spin frequency, and radius. This table highlights the range of pa-rameters appropriate for the slowly and rapidly rotating neu-tron stars discussed in this paper.
> ν(Hz) M(M⊙)Req (km) ζϵ
> 200 1.0 90.164 8.674e-03 200 1.0 12 0.123 2.056e-02 200 1.0 15 0.098 4.016e-02 200 1.4 90.230 6.196e-03 200 1.4 12 0.172 1.469e-02 200 1.4 15 0.138 2.869e-02 200 1.8 90.295 4.819e-03 200 1.8 12 0.221 1.142e-02 200 1.8 15 0.177 2.231e-02 600 1.0 90.164 7.807e-02 600 1.0 12 0.123 1.851e-01 600 1.0 15 0.098 3.614e-01 600 1.4 90.230 5.576e-02 600 1.4 12 0.172 1.322e-01 600 1.4 15 0.138 2.582e-01 600 1.8 90.295 4.337e-02 600 1.8 12 0.221 1.028e-01 600 1.8 15 0.177 2.008e-01
> D. Approximate Shape Functions

All of the shape functions drawn from the literature are constructed with a similar methodology. First, a col-lection of EOSs is chosen. Then the surfaces, R(θ), are computed for a wide range of masses and spin frequen-cies using either a rapid-rotation code (such as RNS ) or the Hartle-Thorne [77, 78] slow-rotation approximation. An angular dependence with coefficients that depend on 

ζ and ϵ is assumed, and a fit to the numerically computed surfaces is found. The shape functions make use of the assumption of approximate universality. Universality is the observation that certain properties of neutron stars follow a relation-ship independent of the specific equation of state chosen. In this context, it is an empirically based assumption that once the mass, equatorial radius, and spin frequency are known, the other rotational properties of the star (such as the oblate shape) depend only on the dimensionless pa-rameters ϵ and ζ in a way that is almost independent of the choice of EOS. The empirical evidence comes from the reported accuracy of each shape function in their origi-nal works. Despite this, there are multiple different shape functions which do not agree with each other, prompting this analysis. The main difference between the different approximate shape functions lies in the assumed angular dependence, the choices of EOS, and the ranges of parameters used. In the following sections, the various approximate shape functions will be described in chronological order. The acronyms for each shape function are formed from the first letters of the authors’ last names.  

> 1. MLCB: Morsink, Leahy, Cadeau, & Braga (2007) [32]

The first shape function proposed, MLCB, was intro-duced [32] as part of the OS approximation. The MLCB shape function models R(θ) as a perturbation from spher-ical symmetry using Legendre polynomials, Pn(cos θ).The formula is 

R(θ) = Req [1 + a0P0(cos θ) + a2P2(cos θ) + a4P4(cos θ)] ,

(15) with coefficients a2n = a2n(ζ, ϵ ) that depend on polyno-mials of ζ and ϵ. The parametrization chosen was an ansatz based on similar parametrizations for other neu-tron star properties found earlier [79, 80]. The neutron star surfaces were computed using RNS ,using a set of equations of state representative of the nuclear theory landscape at the time. The EOS library included the EOS catalog (A, B, C, F, G, L, N, O) of Arnett and Bowers [81], APR [82], a suite of hybrid quark stars with mixed quark-hadron phases, [83], and hyperon-rich models [84]. 7The main issue with the MLCB shape function is that the fitting procedure did not enforce the condition 

Req = R(π/ 2) . This is a known input to the shape func-tion, so allowing R(π/ 2) to deviate introduces unneces-sary errors. Additionally, the use of a wider range of EOSs, masses, radii, and spin frequencies would be an improvement [41]. The MLCB shape function was used in the analysis of RXTE data for the AMXPs SAX J1808-3658 [85, 86], XTE J1814-338 [87], and XTE J1807-294 [88] with spin frequencies ranging from 190 - 401 Hz. Any of the inaccuracies introduced by the shape func-tion are dwarfed by the uncertainties in the atmosphere model for these neutron stars. While the MLCB shape function is not used in any parameter estimation codes which analyze NICER data, we include it for historical completeness. The main interest is that this work showed that the shape could be parameterized in a way that is almost independent of the chosen EOS, making it pos-sible to include the oblate shape without adding extra parameters to a parameter estimation code.  

> 2. BBPO: Bauböck, Berti, Psaltis, & Özel (2013) [39]

The BBPO shape function was introduced for use in a ray-tracing code [89] which makes use of the general-ized quasi-Kerr metric [90], written in Boyer-Lindquist coordinates, which models spacetimes with arbitrary quadrupole moments. The shape function is computed using the Hartle-Thorne [77, 78] slow-rotation approxi-mation, and then fit to the function 

RHT (θ) = R0 + ξ2 P2

 cos θ, (16) where R0 is the equatorial circumferential radius in the non-spinning limit and ξ2 is a coefficient computed in the slow-rotation formalism [39] and depends on the di-mensionless parameters ζ and ϵ. As a technical point, their dimensionless parameters formally depend on the non-rotating values of mass and radius, but they ar-gue [39] that it’s possible to interchange the rotating and non-rotating mass and radius in the slow-rotation approximation. The subscript "HT" indicates that the radius is computed within the coordinate system used in the Hartle-Thorne formalism (which differs from the Schwarzschild radial coordinate). The coefficients for the BBPO shape function were de-termined by fitting to the EOSs AP4, ENG, MPA1, and MS0, which use the naming conventions established by Lattimer and Prakash [80]. The surface defined in the Hartle-Thorne coordinate system is then mapped [39] into the Boyer-Lindquist (BL) coordinates via 

RBL (θ) = RHT (θ) −  GM/c 22a2 Ξ( θ)2R 3HT 

, (17) with 

Ξ( θ) =  RHT + 2 GM/c 2  RHT − GM/c 2

− cos 2 θ  RHT − 2GM/c 2  RHT + 3 GM/c 2

(18) where a is the dimensionless Kerr spin parameter. An empirical fit for the spin parameter’s dependence on ζ

and ϵ is also found [39]. The BL radial variable reduces to the coordinate r in the slow-rotation limit. The BBPO shape function has been used to study the effects of spot size in pulse profile modeling [91], the ef-fects of rotation on thermal spectra [9], and in machine-learning approaches to pulse-profile modeling [92]. The main limitation of the BBPO shape function is that it is limited to slow rotation. It is best adapted for use in codes that work in the BL coordinate sys-tem, but awkward for use in codes that are based on the Schwarzschild coordinate system.  

> 3. AM: AlGendy & Morsink (2014) [40]

The RPPs observed by NICER have spin frequencies in the approximate range of 200 - 350 Hz, which for most masses and radii corresponds to slow rotation. This mo-tivates the AM shape function, which attempts a higher-precision fit to the shape by restricting the spin parame-ter to ϵ ≤ 0.1, which is appropriate for slow rotation and a shape function with a simpler angular dependence, 

R(θ) = Req 

1 + c2(ϵ, ζ ) cos 2 θ, (19) where c2 = c20 ϵ + c21 ϵζ and c20 and c21 are the fit coef-ficients [40]. In the AM fits, the identity R(π/ 2) = Req is enforced, and neutron stars with masses M ≥ 1.0M⊙ up to the maximum mass for the EOS were computed. The fit co-efficients for AM were derived from a set of representative nuclear EOSs designed to span the plausible range of stiff-ness permitted by observational constraints at the time. The EOSs include EOS BBB2 [93], APR [82], ABPR1 [83], H4 [84], and the HLPS family (HLPS1, HLPS2, HLPS3) [94] that represent the softest, intermediate, and stiffest EOSs consistent with then-current nuclear inter-action theory. The AM shape function is used in all of the analyses of NICER timing data of RPPs, as well as the AMXPs SAX J1808-3658 [95], SRGA J144459.2-604207 [96], and burst oscillations from XTE J1814-338 [97] and 4U 1636-536 [98]. The AM shape function is also used in the anal-ysis of unpulsed data of 47 Tuc X7 [11] and SAX J1810.8-2609 [12]. Since the AM shape function is currently used in the analysis of many neutron stars’ X-ray fluxes, it is important to revisit its accuracy. In particular, since it was developed under the constraint that ϵ ≤ 0.1, it may introduce systematic errors in the analysis of more rapidly rotating accreting neutron stars. 8 

> 4. SPYY: Silva, Pappas, Yunes, & Yagi (2021) [41]

The shape functions introduced in the previous sec-tions correspond to perturbations around a spherical shape using Legendre polynomials. An alternative method [41] is to perturb around the ellipsoidal function 

R(μ) = Req 

s

1 − e2

1 − e2 g(μ) , (20) where μ = cos θ. The function g(μ) is defined by g(μ) = 1 + a2μ2 + a4μ4 − (1 + a2 + a4)μ6 and e is the geometric eccentricity, e2 = 1 − (Rpole /R eq )2 . The coefficients a2,

a4, and e depend on different coefficients c(y) 

> n,m

through the equation y,

y(ζ, ϵ ) = c(y)0,0 + c(y)1/2,0 ϵ1/2 + c(y)1,0 ϵ

+ c(y)0,1 ζ + c(y)1,1 ϵζ + c(y)2,0 ϵ2 + c(y)0,2 ζ2, y ∈ { e, a 2, a 4}.

(21) Silva et al. [41] supply two separate coefficient sets, which apply for different ϵ regimes: “slow” ( ϵ ≤ 0.25 ) and “fast” ( ϵ ≥ 0.2). To distinguish between the coefficient sets, we shall call them SPYY(s) for the slow coefficients and SPYY(f) for the fast coefficients. This split into slow and fast is straddled by the range of ϵ appropriate for stars spinning at 600 Hz, as listed in Table II, which leads to some complications in its implementation. The set of EOSs used to construct the models that went into the fit coefficients for SPYY includes FPS [99], SLy4 [100], AU [101], UU [102], APR [82], and L [103].  

> 5. PVLS: Papigkiotis, Vardakas, Likas, & Stergioulas (2025) [42]

The PVLS shape function is based on an artificial neu-ral network (ANN) [42] trained on 70 different EOSs and 

∼ 4×10 4 rotating neutron star models to predict the sur-face shape. Rather than being constrained to one poly-nomial or ellipsoidal dependence over the whole surface, the model is free to learn different behavior at different colatitudes. It has the freedom to model much more ar-bitrary functions across the parameter space. The PVLS ANN-based machine learning model returns the circum-ferential radius R(μ) given the input parameter vector 

θ∗ = ( |μ|, ζ, ϵ, e , where e is the eccentricity. It uses the functional form 

R(μ) = Rpole +  Req − Rpole 

 ˆFθ∗

 |μ|, ζ, ϵ, e . (22) Here ˆFθ∗ represents a call to the ANN model. Since the shape function is not analytic, another ANN model is trained for the logarithmic derivative of the shape func-tion, dlog R/dθ .In typical applications, we have the inputs 

(|μ|, ζ, ϵ, R eq ). Notably absent is e. To obtain e,we utilize their separate polynomial fits for the ratio 

Rpole /R eq and e, which are functions of our inputs. We then invoke calls to their pre-trained models. Our implementation of the PVLS shape function follows the sample Python code published with their paper [42]. PVLS was trained on a comprehensive set of models derived from realistic equations of state sourced from the CompOSE database [1, 104], covering hadronic, hyper-onic, and hybrid EOSs, each providing a full description of the neutron star interior from crust to core. This EOS collection encompasses seventy cold EOSs in total, which represents the largest ensemble employed for obtaining shape functions to date. The models computed include the spin parameter ϵ = 0 (non-rotating) and the non-zero range of 0.0328 ≤ ϵ ≤ 0.9612 , as well as compactness ra-tios 0.0876 ≤ ζ ≤ 0.3095 .As is standard in machine learning, PVLS takes the set of input data (here, the computed shapes from EOSs at different spin frequencies and densities) and divides it randomly into testing and training data. The ANN is trained on the training data and then evaluated on how well the model performs against the test data. An advantage of the artificial neural network (ANN) approach is its ability to potentially identify and account for subtle differences not described by geometric formulas across the surface, if any exist, potentially yielding more accurate surface shapes. In our implementation of their neural network within our modeling code, we utilized their analytical polyno-mial approximation for Rpole /R eq , which is a function of (ζ, ϵ ); as in typical applications, including flux model-ing, we do not exactly know the eccentricity of the neu-tron star a priori. However, this differs from what was implemented in their code to illustrate the accuracy of their ANN. In general, the accuracy of the PVLS shape function is limited by the accuracy of their polynomial expression for Rpole /R eq , an issue that we will discuss in more detail in Section III B.  

> E. EOSs

The goal of this paper is to test the performance of the 5 shape functions introduced earlier by testing whether a shape function calibrated on one set of EOSs can re-produce surfaces computed from other EOSs. The 5 shape functions were all trained on different EOS col-lections where all the EOSs include a hadronic compo-nent and may or may not include hyperons or a quark core. Since we only require examples of types of errors, we don’t require an extensive collection of EOSs and have chosen only 7 EOSs. All are cold EOSs for mat-ter in β equilibrium, and have maximum non-rotating masses that are at least 1.97 M⊙. Four of the EOSs are taken from the CompOSE database (CompOSE labels are given below with our abbreviations in square brack-ets) [1, 104, 105]: a hadronic EOS using a chiral SU(3) model "DS(CMF-2) with crust" [CMF2] [106]; two EOSs 9using the Thomas-Fermi approximation and two different density functionals, "XMLSLZ(NL3)" [NL3], and "XML-SLZ(PKDD)" [PKDD] [107]; and a hybrid hadronic-quark EOS "KBH(QHC21A)" [QHC21A] [108]. These 4 EOSs are moderately stiff, with R1.4 ranging from 12.4 to 14.6 km. Of this group, only CMF2 was used in the PVLS shape function. None of these 4 EOSs were used in the other 4 shape functions. We additionally use 3 piecewise polytrope models, HLPS1-3 [94], that are con-sistent with nuclear experiments as of 2013 and were used in the AM shape function. The softest of these, HLPS1, is much softer than any of the EOSs used in the PVLS shape function. We do not consider any EOSs that describe bare quark stars without hadronic crusts in this analysis. Bare quark stars are known to have shape functions that differ some-what from the hadronic shape functions [32, 109]. Since the 5 shape functions do not include bare quark stars, such stars are outside of the scope of this work. As a re-minder, when we are testing the universality of a shape function, what we mean is quasi-universality restricted to hadronic EOSs.  

> III. SHAPE FUNCTION ERRORS

One of the goals of this paper is to understand the mag-nitudes, morphology, and dependencies of the R(θ) errors in the various shape functions introduced in Section II D. In this section, we present our comparisons of the shapes computed with RNS , R(θ) ≡ RRNS (θ), and the various approximate shape functions Rsf (θ) calculated with the same values of M , Req , and ν as the RNS reference shape. Table III summarizes the RNS input parameter grid used to generate the tabulated reference surfaces. The nominal grid contains 7 × 14 × 9 = 882 possible RNS in-put combinations, although only combinations for which 

RNS returned a valid stellar model were retained. For each model, we compare the shape function surface to the corresponding RNS surface at the same values of 

M , Req , and ν. We define the local radius difference by 

∆R(x) = Rsf (x) − RRNS (x), x ∈ { μ, θ }, (23) where μ = cos θ. All signed errors are defined as the shape function value minus the RNS reference value. Apositive radius error therefore means that the approxi-mate shape function places the surface outside the RNS 

surface at that colatitude. In the radius error plots, we show the signed percent radius error 

ER(x) ≡ 100 ∆R(x)

RRNS (x) , x ∈ { μ, θ }. (24) This is the quantity plotted in the colatitude-dependent radius error figures, in the dΩ surface comparison plots, and used in the universality analysis below.  

> A. Latitudinal Morphology of the Radial Error

We found three broad morphologies of shape function errors. These errors depend on the choice of shape func-tion, but not on the chosen EOS. For illustrative pur-poses, we show the dependence of the shape function er-ror as a function of μ for 4 stars constructed from the CMF2 EOS in Figure 2. Each panel of Figure 2 shows the errors for a star with central density 5.0×10 14 g cm −3

and different spin frequencies. The values of M , Req ,

ν, ζ, and ϵ are shown for each panel. As shown else-where [110], the value of ζ for stars with the same EOS and central density is approximately independent of spin. In each panel, the percent error in the function R(μ) is plotted as a function of μ, where μ = 0 corresponds to the equator, and μ = 1 is the spin pole. The types of errors that are shown in Figure 2 are described in the next sections. These error types recur across different equations of state with different compactness and spin parameters, indicating that the colatitude dependence of the radius error depends on the structure of the shape function rather than any one EOS.    

> 1. Less (or More) Elliptical Than the RNS Reference Model

The error in the radius of the surface and its derivative with respect to μ both grow monotonically from the equa-tor to the spin pole, with the greatest error at the pole. The MLCB, SPYY, and PVLS (for ϵ > 0.04 ) shape func-tions illustrate this type of error in all panels, with pos-itive error at the pole. Positive error at the pole means that the approximate polar radius is too large, meaning that the shape is overall less elliptical than the reference shape. The magnitudes of the errors for the SPYY and PVLS shape functions are typically similar, with slightly smaller errors for PVLS in most cases. We have found a few examples of the SPYY shape function with differ-ent values of ζ that are more elliptical than the reference shape. We speculate that the SPYY shape function con-tains enough freedom in the μ dependence that an up-date could provide an approximation with much smaller errors.  

> 2. Bloated (or Pinched) at Mid-Colatitudes

The error in the radius has a maximum or minimum at a mid-colatitude. The BBPO and AM shape functions for ϵ > 0.1 show this behavior. Note that neither of these shape functions is meant to be used for the higher spin cases shown in the lower two panels, but we show the errors to illustrate the issue. Both of these shape functions only include contributions that are quadratic in 

μ, which does not provide enough functional freedom to model the shape of more rapidly rotating neutron stars. However, they both provide a good description of slowly rotating neutron stars. 10 

TABLE III. RNS input parameter grid used to generate the tabulated reference surfaces. Input axis Values Notes EOS CMF2, HLPS1, HLPS2, HLPS3, NL3, PKDD, QHC21A Central density ρc 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.5, 10 , 12 .5, 15 , 17 .5, 20 , 22 .5, 25 , 27 .5, 30 ×10 14 g cm −3

Spin frequency ν 10 −5, 100 , 200 , 300 , 400 , 500 , 600 , 700 , 800 Hz The non-rotating limit is 10 −5 Hz 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                             

> ¹(cos μ)
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
> ER(¹) (%)
> M= 1 :191 M¯; R eq = 13 :75 km ; º = 200 Hz ;³= 0 :128 ; ² = 0 :026
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> ER(¹) (%)
> M= 1 :232 M¯; R eq = 14 :19 km ; º = 400 Hz ;³= 0 :128 ; ² = 0 :11
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> -2 -1 012345
> ER(¹) (%)
> M= 1 :317 M¯; R eq = 15 :11 km ; º = 600 Hz ;³= 0 :129 ; ² = 0 :281
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> -5 0510 15 20
> ER(¹) (%)
> M= 1 :501 M¯; R eq = 17 :37 km ; º = 800 Hz ;³= 0 :128 ; ² = 0 :665
> Percent Error
> AM BBPO MLCB PVLS SPYY(s) SPYY(f)

FIG. 2. Percent error in shape functions R(μ) as a function of μ = cos θ. Each panel represents one stellar model computed with RNS using the EOS CMF2 with a central density of 5×10 14 g cm −3, but a different spin frequency. The equator corresponds to μ = 0 , and the spin pole is μ = 1 . Positive values for the percent error indicate that the shape function gives a larger radius than the RNS reference model at that colatitude. SPYY(f) is only shown where ϵ ≥ 0.2. This figure illustrates examples of the morphology of shape function radial errors as a function of latitude. 

3. Irregular 

The error does not have an easily described shape, possessing bumps or valleys, which do not vary in a smooth way. The PVLS shape function at small val-ues of ϵ exhibits irregular errors, which are manifested as the "bump" in the PVLS shape error seen in the 200 Hz panel. While this is not a large error, it is concerning, since this is a typical spin frequency observed in RPPs. The non-zero spin training data for the PVLS shape func-tion only included models with ϵ ≥ 0.0328 , while this star has ϵ below the training range. This bump is seen in most models with small ϵ approximated with PVLS. This sug-gests that future ANNs should be trained on models with smaller values of ϵ.

B. Polar Radius in the PVLS Shape Function 

The errors in the PVLS shape function shown in Fig-ure 2 are typically largest at the pole and increase in magnitude with ϵ, approaching 1% in some panels. This should be contrasted with the errors computed in the original paper by Papigkiotis et al. [42], which are gen-erally much smaller (see, for example, their Figure 21). This discrepancy is due to how the model takes in infor-11 mation about the polar radius. In their PVLS analysis, 

RNS was used to compute the star’s equatorial and polar radii and the eccentricity, which were then input into the ANN to predict the dependence on angle through equa-tion (22). Since the RNS polar radius is input into the equation for the radius [42], the error at the pole is typ-ically of order 10 −3 − 10 −4 %, and does not show much variation with spin rate. However, in applications such as pulse-profile model-ing, the polar radius is not a known quantity. Instead, the equatorial radius and mass are free parameters, and the polar radius (or the eccentricity) has to be predicted us-ing a universal shape function. In order to use the PVLS shape function in pulse-profile models, it is necessary to first use their polynomial fit for the polar-to-equatorial radius ratio, which depends on ζ and ϵ, and has errors that grow with ϵ that can be as large as about 3%. The error in their polynomial fit for the polar radius then dominates the error in the shape function. In Figure 3, we recreate the ANN error histograms (using tan and brown colors) shown in Figure 20 of PVLS [42], using the dataset of RNS neutron star surface shapes and polar radii avail-able in their online repository. When we make use of the PVLS shape models but use their approximate formula for Rpole instead of the RNS reference polar radius, the distribution of errors shifts to larger values. In particu-lar, the maximum error over their entire dataset increases by about an order of magnitude from 0.25% (brown tri-angle) to 2.77% (blue triangle). We also used their ana-lytical fit for eccentricity to predict the polar radius and found it to be slightly less accurate than their analyti-cal fit for Rpole , as shown by the purple histogram and triangle. The tan, green, and gold histograms show the distribution of errors when the restriction ϵ < 0.1 is ap-plied, where tan shows the original PVLS histogram, and the green and gold histograms show the increase in er-rors when the PVLS analytical approximations for Rpole 

and e are used, respectively. The maximum error for the low-spin dataset also increases by an order of magnitude from 0.02% (tan triangle) to 0.36% (green triangle). For reference, with the same dataset, SPYY(s) has a maxi-mum relative error of 1.12% at ϵ ≤ 0.1 and a maximum relative error of 5.12% across the whole dataset; AM has a maximum relative error of 0.56% at ϵ ≤ 0.1 and a max-imum relative error of 44 .11% across the whole dataset. The jump in the magnitude of the errors in the PVLS shape function shown in Figure 3 illustrates that the key factor limiting the accuracy is the model for the polar radius given the equatorial radius, spin parameter, and compactness. If we were able to obtain a perfectly ac-curate model for the polar radius, then our remaining errors in the mid-latitudes would only be on the order of 

0.25% .10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 10 1

Absolute Relative Error [%]   

> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5
> PVLS RNS Data PDF

ANN Verification             

> ANN (dataset Rp), all spins. ANN (dataset Rp), ²0.1.
> ANN (Analytical Rp), all spins. ANN (Analytical Rp), ²0.1.
> ANN (Analytical e→Rp), all spins. ANN (Analytical e→Rp), ²0.1.
> Max rel error: 0.25% Max rel error: 0.02% Max rel error: 2.77% Max rel error: 0.36% Max rel error: 2.99% Max rel error: 0.37%

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 10 1

## Absolute Relative Error [%] 

10 3

10 1

10 1

10 3

10 5

> PVLS RNS Data PDF

## ANN Verification             

> ANN (dataset Rp), all spins. ANN (dataset Rp), ²0.1.
> ANN (Analytical Rp), all spins. ANN (Analytical Rp), ²0.1.
> ANN (Analytical e→Rp), all spins. ANN (Analytical e→Rp), ²0.1.
> Max rel error: 0.25% Max rel error: 0.02% Max rel error: 2.77% Max rel error: 0.36% Max rel error: 2.99% Max rel error: 0.37%

FIG. 3. Histogram of the distribution of errors relative to the PVLS library [42] of neutron star shapes computed using 

RNS . PDF refers to the probability density function; absolute relative error refers to the magnitude of the relative difference between the ANN’s prediction and the RNS reference model. The binned data consist of all tabulated μ points on all sur-faces of every stellar model computed by [42]. Dataset Rp

refers to a polar radius taken from the RNS reference model, analytical Rp refers to utilizing an Rpole dependent on their analytical fit for Rp, and analytical e → Rp refers to comput-ing Rp via their polynomial fit for eccentricity. Max rel error is the maximum relative error out of all stellar models at any point along the surface. In this paper, we are limited by the accuracy of their analytical Rp.

C. Errors in the Derivative of the Shape Function 

The derivative of the shape function with respect to colatitude determines the direction of the local surface normal. In the OS approximation, it affects the surface-slope factor q and the angle τ between the radial direc-tion and the surface normal defined in equations (10) and (11). This error then propagates into the differential solid angle and flux. For illustrative purposes, Figure 4 shows the derivative error as a function of μ for the same four example neutron stars shown in Figure 2. Throughout the remainder of this paper, a prime denotes differentiation with respect to the displayed argument, so R′(μ) ≡ dR (μ)/dμ and 

R′(θ) ≡ dR (θ)/dθ .We define the signed derivative error by 

ER′ (x) ≡ 100 ∆R′(x)

RRNS (x) = 100 R′ 

> sf

(x) − R′

> RNS

(x)

RRNS (x) , x ∈ { μ, θ }.

(25) Figure 4 uses x = μ, while the later surface maps use 

x = θ. We normalize by the radius rather than its deriva-tive to avoid uninformative division-by-zero divergences. Since ER is itself normalized by RRNS (μ), ER′ is not the derivative of ER. Positive values of ER′ indicate that the shape function has a larger slope than the RNS surface. The derivative errors broadly follow the same classes seen in the radius errors. Smooth one-sided radius errors 12 have consistently positive or negative derivative errors. Mid-colatitude bumps or valleys in R(μ) appear as sign changes in the derivative error. Irregular radius errors, such as those seen with PVLS at low ϵ, produce corre-spondingly irregular derivative errors. The AM, BBPO, MLCB, and SPYY shape functions are analytic functions of μ, so the derivative R′(μ) is sim-ple to compute. However, the ANN used in the PVLS model is not analytic, so the derivative of the radius is predicted by a separately trained neural network [42], whose results are close to the derivative of the radius re-sults, but not identical. We use the result of the PVLS secondary neural network to compute R′(μ). One conse-quence of computing R′(μ) with a different neural net-work is that its error does not correspond to the bump error in the top-left panel. A careful inspection of the top-left panel of Figure 4 reveals that the PVLS error shoots upwards as μ ap-proaches 1.0. The same effect may be observed in sub-sequent dΩ plots (shown in later figures) which display 

ER′ (θ). In the original PVLS paper [42], they utilized 521 samples uniformly spaced in μ, which leaves a gap between μ = 519 /520 and μ = 1 .0, corresponding to 

0◦ ≤ θ ≲ 3.55 ◦. This gap is not probed by their training data, ANN, or testing, and subsequently no issues are shown in their paper. However, we found that within this gap, their derivative ANN consistently produces a sharp spike in ER′ on the order of 2% . Our subsequent results may show the full spike or only part of the spike depending on our sampling of the region near the pole. The types of errors in the derivatives shown in Fig-ure 4 recur across a broad range of EOSs, compactness, and spin parameters. From our larger collection of mod-els, we note that the types of errors in radius and radius derivative depend on the choice of shape function, not on the EOS, which lends credence to the concept of univer-sality.  

> D. Variation of the Shape Error Across the Parameter Space

We now investigate the dependence of the errors in the five shape functions on the dimensionless compactness and spin parameters ζ and ϵ using the rotating neutron star models generated with RNS shown in Table III. To simplify the analysis, for each model computed and shape function tested, we introduce a signed extremal radius error, MaxE R. Let μmax be the value of μ = cos θ at which the absolute percent radius error is largest, 

μmax = arg max 

> 0≤μ≤1

|ER(μ)| . (26) We define the signed extremal radius error 

MaxE R = ER(μmax ). (27) The extremal radius error is the signed percent radius difference at the colatitude where the radius error lies furthest from zero. A positive value means that the shape function is too large at the worst-error colatitude. The left panel of Figure 5 shows the variation in the extremal radius error as a function of compactness and spin parameter (for small ϵ) for the five shape functions for one particular choice of EOS (HLPS1). The shape functions have different error patterns and dependence on the spin parameter and compactness. This illustrates that each shape function behaves differently within the parameter space. For brevity, we only show models com-puted with one EOS, but these patterns apply to all of the EOSs that we tested. The right panel of Figure 5 illustrates the extremal ra-dius error for one specific shape function, SPYY(s), for all 7 EOSs. In this plot, the extremal radius errors appear to form a surface in the ϵ − ζ parameter space, independent of the choice of EOS. This surface, formed by the errors, hints at the validity of the assumption underlying univer-sality. If the neutron star shape were not universal, the errors for different EOSs would show random scatter for models with the same value of ζ and ϵ. Since the errors for any shape function show structure, we hypothesize that a better empirical fit is possible. The same extremal radius error is shown for three of the shape functions in panel (a) of Figure 6. We explore the possibility of better empirical fits in the next section. Figure 3 may appear to suggest that large relative er-rors are unlikely. This is due to the different error sum-maries being emphasized. Figure 3 presents the distribu-tion of pointwise errors over all sampled colatitudes ( 521 

points over μ ∈ [0 , 1] ) and all stellar models, in which a small number of local high-error points contribute only weakly to the overall distribution. The maximum error defined in this section emphasizes the largest difference on the surface of each particular star.  

> E. Universality Analysis

In Section III D, we found that the extremal radius error for any shape function appears to depend on the spin and compactness parameters. This structure sug-gests that the shape has an approximately universal de-pendence on ϵ and ζ and that it could be possible to construct a corrected shape function with smaller errors. We can quantify this idea by fitting a simple correction surface Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ) to the error ∆R(μ) at each value of μ.We assume a simple polynomial correction to the radius error with the form 

Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ) = μ X

> a∈{ 1,3}

X

> b+c≤3

Cabc μaζbϵc, (28) where the restriction a ∈ { 1, 3} preserves reflection sym-metry through the equatorial plane. The prefactor of μ

ensures that the correction surface vanishes at the equa-tor, so we assume that Rsf has been matched to the cor-rect equatorial radius, as is true for all of the shape func-13 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                               

> ¹(cos μ)
> -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
> ER 0 (¹)
> M=1.191 M ¯,Req =13.75 km, º= 200 Hz ,
> ³= 0.128, ²= 0.026
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> -4 -2 024
> ER 0 (¹)
> M=1.232 M ¯,Req =14.19 km, º= 400 Hz ,
> ³= 0.128, ²= 0.11
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> -15 -10 -5 0510 15
> ER 0 (¹)
> M=1.317 M ¯,Req =15.11 km, º= 600 Hz ,
> ³= 0.129, ²= 0.281
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> ¹(cos μ)
> -60 -40 -20 020 40 60
> ER 0 (¹)
> M=1.501 M ¯,Req =17.37 km, º= 800 Hz ,
> ³= 0.128, ²= 0.665
> ER0(¹)
> AM BBPO MLCB PVLS SPYY(s) SPYY(f)

FIG. 4. Signed derivative error ER′ (μ) for the shape functions as a function of μ = cos θ. Each panel represents one stellar model computed with RNS using the EOS CMF2 with a central density of 5 × 10 14 g cm −3, but a different spin frequency. The equator corresponds to μ = 0 , and the spin pole is μ = 1 . Positive values indicate that the shape function has a larger slope than the RNS surface at that colatitude. 

tions except MLCB. The coefficients Cabc are found by linear regression. Given the best-fit correction surface, the corrected shape function is 

Rsf ,c(μ) = Rsf (μ) − Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ). (29) The remaining radius error is 

∆Rc(μ) = Rsf ,c(μ) − RRNS (μ) = ∆ R(μ) − Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ).

(30) The corrected percent radius error is 

ER, c(μ) = 100 ∆R(μ) − Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ )

RRNS (μ) . (31) Extremal errors in the corrected surface are defined anal-ogously to Eq. (27). We focus on fitting the errors for 3 of the shape func-tions: AM, SPYY(s), and PVLS. The AM shape function was examined due to its use in NICER analyses; SPYY(s) since it has a simple geometric form; and PVLS since it was created using machine learning with the largest neu-tron star surface dataset to date. Furthermore, PVLS typically has the lowest scale of overall error. We don’t provide the values of the fit coefficients, since this is only a "proof-of-principle" done with a very limited number of EOSs. Our fits to the errors should be thought of as an upper bound on the errors produced by a hypothet-ical better shape function. Most shape functions utilize a more sophisticated description of the surface R(θ), so it may be possible to construct a shape function with smaller errors than what we show here. Our results are presented in Figure 6, with each hori-zontal row representing the errors in each shape function. Panel (a) illustrates the extremal radial error dependence on ϵ and ζ for the given shape function. Note that the errors in the AM and SPYY(s) shape functions are very large because these shape functions were derived only us-ing stars with slow rotation ( ϵ ≤ 0.1 for AM and ϵ ≤ 0.25 

for SPYY(s)). The training data for PVLS and SPYY shape functions are restricted to ζ ≥ 0.08 . The AM shape function restricted its models to M ≥ 1.0M⊙, which leads 14 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12       

> Spin parameter ²
> −0.8 0.0 0.8 1.6
> HLPS1 EOS, for different Shape Functions
> Shape Function
> AM BBPO MLCB PVLS SPYY(s)
> MaxE R (%)
> Compactness  ³0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.00 0.15 0.30 0.45 0.60
> Spin parameter ²
> 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
> SPYY(s), for different EOS
> Equation of State
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A
> MaxE R (%)
> Compactness  ³

FIG. 5. Representative examples of the dependence of the extremal radius error on compactness and spin parameter. The left panel shows a zoomed-in view of the errors relative to the HLPS1 EOS, illustrating how different shape functions possess different error morphologies over the same region of parameter space. The right panel shows the errors of SPYY(s) [41] relative to our set of EOSs, illustrating how the shape function’s errors appear to fall on the same smooth surface regardless of EOS. Positive values indicate that the shape function overestimates, while negative values indicate an underestimate. In both panels, the transparency of a point corresponds to the compactness of the neutron star. 

to a similar restriction on ζ. In the case of PVLS, the errors for very small (and most likely nonphysical) ζ are larger, as would be expected since small ζ values were not part of their training data. Similarly, larger errors for ϵ ≤ 0.03 can be seen as a red vertical strip in the PVLS panel, which is also due to sampling models out-side the range of parameters used in the training data set. Panel (b) of Figure 6 illustrates the corrected extremal radius error found after fitting Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ) to ∆R. In the case of AM and SPYY(s), we obtain an order of magni-tude decrease in the scale of their errors. In the case of PVLS, the scale of the error barely decreases. For large 

ϵ, the remaining error in the corrected shape functions for AM and SPYY(s) shown in panel (b) has an approxi-mately random distribution of positive and negative error residuals that don’t appear to have any structure in the 

ζ dimension. The increase in error with ϵ suggests that a polynomial with higher powers in μ and ϵ is probably required for these cases. The residual errors for PVLS still show structure in the ϵ dimension, suggesting that the polynomial approach taken here may not be sufficient to correct for the ANN. Alternatively, we may speculate that we are approaching a floor in the assumption of uni-versality, that shape functions might not be able to model neutron star surface shapes any more accurately. Fur-ther research is required to ascertain this. In the case of PVLS, it would probably be more useful to create a new training data set that provides more very slowly rotating models, to correct for the errors seen near ϵ ≤ 0.03 .Panel (c) illustrates the dependence of the corrected error ER, c(μ) on μ, with colors representing the EOSs as defined in panels (d) and (e). The majority of the remaining error continues to be towards the poles, but the bulk of the error (5th to 95th percentile) lies within 

±0.5% for all three shape functions. Only a tiny per-centage of the cases have errors approaching the ends of the ±4% range (which correspond to the most rapidly rotating models). Notably, all three shape functions are comparable in their 5th and 95th percentile ranges. The boxplots in panel (d) illustrate the extremal cor-rected errors for individual EOSs. The red line in each box is the median, the edges of the box are the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers stretch out to the 5th and 95th percentiles. For most cases, the 25th to 75th percentile ranges are smallest and are closest to zero for SPYY. The median values show the largest variation for PVLS, where for a couple of EOSs, the 25th to 75th per-centile range does not include zero. The contrast is most obvious between HLPS3 and PKDD, the former of which skews towards positive errors and the latter towards neg-ative errors for its 25th to 75th percentile range. This contrast in their skew is seen to a lesser extent with the other shape functions. It is unclear whether this hints at a limit to the quasi-universality assumption, or if this fea-ture emerges specifically due to the shape function. Fur-thermore, its 25th to 75th percentile spread is of compa-rable or larger scale to that of the other shape functions, despite its overall largest outliers being smaller than the other two shape functions. The investigation so far utilized all EOSs to fit Rc.However, the assumption of universality suggests that a 15 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.85 

Spin parameter ε    

> 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.34
> Compactness  ζ (a)
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.85

Spin parameter ε   

> 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.34 (b)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0

μ = cos θ

> −1 01
> ER, c(μ) (%)
> (c)
> 5th percentile 95th percentile
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1 01
> Max  ER, c (%)
> (d)
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1 01
> Max  ER, cc  (%)
> (e)
> −20 020
> MaxE R (%)
> −2.5 0.0 2.5
> Max  ER, c (%)

AM 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.85 

Spin parameter ε    

> 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.34
> Compactness  ζ (a)
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.85

Spin parameter ε   

> 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.34 (b)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0

μ = cos θ

> −1 01
> ER, c(μ) (%)
> (c)
> 5th percentile 95th percentile
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1 01
> Max  ER, c (%)
> (d)
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1 01
> Max  ER, cc  (%)
> (e)
> −20 020
> MaxE R (%)
> −2 02
> Max  ER, c (%)

SPYY(s) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.85 

Spin parameter ε    

> 0.09 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.31
> Compactness  ζ (a)
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.85

Spin parameter ε   

> 0.09 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.31 (b)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0

μ = cos θ

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> ER, c(μ) (%)
> (c)
> 5th percentile 95th percentile
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> Max  ER, c (%)
> (d)
> CMF2 HLPS1 HLPS2 HLPS3 NL3 PKDD QHC21A

EOS 

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> Max  ER, cc  (%)
> (e)
> −2 02
> MaxE R (%)
> −1 01
> Max  ER, c (%)

PVLS 

FIG. 6. Empirical all-EOS correction surface fits to the radius errors of AM, SPYY(s), and PVLS. For each shape function, panel (a) shows the extremal radius error as a function of compactness and spin. Panel (b) shows the corrected extremal error after fitting Rc(μ, ζ, ϵ ) to the full EOS sample. Panel (c) shows the corrected error as a function of colatitude, with the 5th percentile marked in blue and the 95th percentile marked in orange. The points in panel (c) have the same colors as the EOSs identified in panel (d). Panel (d) shows the distribution of corrected errors by EOS for the all-EOS fit using Rc, while panel (e) shows the corresponding cross-verification distribution obtained using Rcc , fitted without the EOS being tested. In the box plots in panels (d) and (e), the boxes span the 25th to 75th percentiles, the central line marks the median, and the whiskers extend to the 5th and 95th percentiles. If most of the error can be modeled by a single smooth function of (μ, ζ, ϵ ), then we may obtain an upper bound on the remaining radius error unexplained by the correction surface. 

shape function fitted for one set of nuclear equations of state will be generalizable across other EOSs. For this cross-verification fit, the corrected percent radius error is 

ER, cc (μ) = 100 ∆R(μ) − Rcc (μ, ζ, ϵ )

RRNS (μ) . (32) In panel (e), we fit Rcc to every other equation of state except for the chosen equation of state, and then examine the extremal error for the given equation of state in the same way. We observe minimal differences between these results and those of (d), supporting the hypothesis of universality in the sense of generalization of the shape function across different EOSs, but perhaps up to a limit, as seen by the skew of the errors relative to zero as those offsets persist. These results suggest that it would be possible to con-struct a more accurate version of SPYY using a fit with higher-order polynomials and a much larger collection of EOSs than were used in the original paper. 

IV. IMPACT OF SHAPE FUNCTION ERRORS ON DIFFERENTIAL SOLID ANGLE 

In Section III, we computed the errors in the surface shape R(θ) and its derivative. However, neither quantity is directly observable. We observe the flux from a patch of the star, which is proportional to the differential solid angle, dΩ, subtended by the patch. In the OS approxima-tion, errors in the shape and its derivative propagate into the differential solid angle and the flux through Eq. (13). Here, we examine the dΩ.For each visible surface element, we define the local differential solid angle difference by 

∆( dΩ) = dΩsf − dΩRNS , (33) 16 where dΩsf is the solid angle subtended by the spot on the star using one of the approximate shape functions and dΩRNS is the solid angle computed using the RNS 

reference shape at the same location on the star. The signed percent difference is defined by 

EdΩ = 100 ∆( dΩ) 

dΩRNS 

. (34)  

> A. Analytic Approximation to the Differential Solid Angle Error

We now derive a simple analytical approximation to the differential solid angle error in order to aid the un-derstanding of how errors in the shape function affect the error in the differential solid angle. In the derivation of this approximation, we treat the following quantities as exact: the angular coordinates θ and ϕ of the hot spot on the surface of the star, the observer’s inclination angle 

i, and the distance to the star D. This allows us to fo-cus only on the errors introduced by the shape function. Throughout this subsection, unlabeled quantities such as 

R(θ), R′(θ), and dΩ refer to the quantities defined by the OS geometry, rather than to any particular numerically computed stellar model. Based on the spherical trigonometric definitions used in the OS approximation given in Eqs. (5) and (6), the angles ψ and λ are known exactly if θ, ϕ, and i are known exactly. Although the bending angle ψ is known exactly, the an-gle α between the photon’s initial direction and the radial direction depends implicitly on the radial location of the emitting region through Eqs. (7) and (8). We can gain a more intuitive understanding of this dependence by em-ploying the Beloborodov approximation [111], which re-lates ψ and α through the expansion 

1 − cos ψ = 11 − 2MR

(1 − cos α) + O(1 − cos α)3. (35) Since the coefficient of the term of order (1 − cos α)3 is very small [111], this approximation is surprisingly good even for photons emitted in directions far from the ra-dial direction. Its accuracy as a function of compactness and emission angle is shown in Figure 2 of Ref. [111]. We found that the error in the bending angle ψ falls below 5% for local compactness M/R (θ) ≤ 0.2317 , and the error in the inferred emission angle α falls below 5% 

for M/R (θ) ≤ 0.25 . Although we do not use the Be-loborodov approximation in our numerical calculations, we use it here to derive an analytical approximation to the solid angle error. Differentiating Eq. (35), we find 

11 − 2MR

∂ cos α∂ cos ψ R

= 1 + O(1 − cos α)2, (36) so, within this level of approximation, the product of the self-lensing and Jacobian factors appearing in Eq. (13) is constant and does not contribute to the error. The fractional error in the differential solid angle in this ap-proximation is then 

∆( dΩ) 

dΩ ≃ 2 ∆R(θ)

R(θ) + ∆PP , (37) where the projection term P is the combination of terms 

P ≡ cos σ

cos τ = cos α + tan τ sin α cos λ. (38) The first term in Eq. (37) gives the simple intuitive result that an error in the radial distance leads to an error in the surface area at that point. Errors in the angles α and 

τ both contribute to the error in the projection term. Within the Beloborodov approximation, the error in the angle α follows from differentiating Eq. (35) with respect to R,

∆ cos α ≃ − 2MR

11 − 2MR

(1 − cos α) ∆RR , (39) where R and ∆R are evaluated at the latitude of the spot. The error in the angle τ does not require any approxi-mation and follows directly from Eqs. (10) and (11), 

∆τ = cos 2 τ

− 1 − MR

1 − 2MR

tan τ ∆RR + 1

q

1 − 2MR

∆R′(θ)

R

 .

(40) However, the angle τ is always small, so the error in τ is well approximated by 

∆τ ≃ 1

q

1 − 2MR

∆R′(θ)

R +O



τ ∆RR



+O



τ 2 ∆R′(θ)

R



,

(41) so that the error in the angle τ between the radial and normal directions is dominated by the error in the deriva-tive of the shape function. The angular dependence of these errors differs. Since the surface is axisymmetric, R, R′, ∆R, and ∆R′ depend only on θ. The error ∆τ therefore also depends only on θ.In contrast, ∆ cos α depends on both θ and ϕ through α,since α is determined by the bending angle ψ(θ, ϕ, i ) and the local radius R(θ). The projection factor P combines 

α, λ, and τ , so its error generally depends on both θ

and ϕ, even though the underlying shape function errors depend only on θ.The final result for the error in the projection term is 

∆PP ≃ 1cos σ

"

− 2MR

11 − 2MR

(1 − cos α) ∆RR (42) 

+ cos λ sin α 1

q

1 − 2MR

∆R′(θ)

R

 + O(τ ).17 Since M/R is typically small, the error in the projection term is dominated by the error in the derivative of the radius. The sign of this error depends on the sign of 

cos λ, since all of the other terms are positive. The final analytical approximation for the percent er-ror in the differential solid angle is 

EdΩ ≃ 2ER +

"

− 2MR

11 − 2MR

(1 − cos α) 1cos σ

#

ER

+

cos λ 1

q

1 − 2MR

sin α

cos σ

 ER′ . (43) The projection error term is small for photons emitted near the radial direction ( α → 0), where the error in the differential solid angle will be close to twice the magni-tude of the error in the shape function. At the limb, where cos σ → 0, the error from the projection term di-verges since the solid angle approaches zero at the limb. For photons emitted in other directions, there are contri-butions from both the errors in the shape function and its derivative that depend on the angular location of the emitting region on the star (through the dependencies of 

α, σ, and λ on θ and ϕ) and on the compactness of the star. The sign of cos λ makes an important contribution to the magnitude and sign of the overall error in the solid angle. Since the dependence of cos λ on the values of ϕ,

θ, and i is nontrivial, we show its values for some special cases in Table IV.                                                                                        

> iϕθψcos λ
> 00≤ϕ≤2π0≤θ≤πθ+1
> π/ 20θ < π/ 2π/ 2−θ−1
> π/ 20θ > π/ 2θ−π/ 2+1
> π/ 2πθ < π/ 2θ+π/ 2+1
> π/ 2πθ > π/ 23π/ 2−θ−10< i < π/ 20θ < i i−θ−10< i < π/ 20θ > i θ−i+1 0< i < π/ 2πθ < π −iθ+i+1 0< i < π/ 2πθ > π −i2π−(θ+i)−1
> TABLE IV. Values of the bending angle ψand the cosine of the interior angle λfor the full range of inclination and spot colatitude θ, as well as for special values of spot longitude
> ϕ.The longitude of the observer is ϕ= 0 , while ϕ=π
> corresponds to longitude on the side of the star opposite to the observer.
> B. Examples of Differential Solid Angle Error Patterns

In this section, we provide some examples to illustrate the error in the differential solid angle, and hence its contribution to the flux. The solid angle error depends on the errors in the radius and the radius derivative, the observer’s inclination, as well as the stellar parameters ζ

and ϵ. Since the dependencies depend on the position of the emitting area on the star, and are fairly complex, we focus on a few examples that best illuminate the types of problems that occur. In each example, as in Figure 7, we show a horizontal row with 5 panels. The first 3 panels from left to right represent the surface of the star, plotted as a rectangle. The horizontal axis in each case is the longitudinal angle 

ϕ of the infinitesimal emitting area. The observer is lo-cated at ϕ = 0 , so that the center of the plot at ϕ = π

is the longitude opposite to the observer. The vertical axes correspond to the colatitude θ of the emitting area, where θ = 0 is the north spin axis and θ = π is the south spin axis. Each of the three panels shows the per-cent error in dΩ from the point of view of an observer located at the inclination angle given in the label above the panel, and indicated with a yellow circle on the ver-tical axis. The color bar at the far right of the figure shows the percent error in the differential solid angle of a surface element at the given location on the star due to the use of the indicated approximate shape function, as viewed by an observer located at the given inclination angle. The maximum color saturation on either end cor-responds to the larger absolute value of the 5th and 95th percentiles. The white regions are the parts of the star that are not visible to the observer. The fourth and fifth panels show the profile of the errors in the radius and radius derivative (with respect to θ). Figure 7 illustrates errors for a neutron star spinning at 200 Hz, typical of the slower RPPs observed by NICER, while Figure 8 exam-ines the use of the AM shape function in current NICER pulse profile analysis of the fastest RPP, spinning close to 350 Hz. Figure 9 illustrates errors at higher ϵ where the AM shape function has a bloated error profile, and Figure 10 illustrates the relative weight of different com-ponents of the dΩ error and the error’s overall impact at different locations.    

> 1. Observer at i= 0 ◦

Observations of the rotating neutron star down the rotation axis are shown in the i = 0 ◦ panels in each ex-ample. This simple case shows the relative contributions of ER and ER′ to EdΩ at each latitude, and is easiest to interpret since they are independent of longitude on the star. From Table IV, when i = 0 , cos λ = 1 , sim-plifying equation 43. Light emitted from the north pole (θ = 0 ) travels to the observer with α = σ = 0 for this case, meaning that the error in the differential solid an-gle is approximately twice the error in the radius at this latitude. In Figure 7, the stellar model is the same as the stel-lar model shown in the top left panels of Figures 2 and 4. In Figure 7, the value of ER at the north pole is ap-proximately +0 .11% for the AM shape function, and the error EdΩ shown in the leftmost panel at this latitude is approximately +0 .22% . Similarly, the lower panels show 18 0 ¼= 2 ¼ 3¼= 2 2¼                                                                                 

> 0
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> ¼
> i= 0 ±
> 00.25 0.5
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 45 ±
> -0.5 -0.25
> 0
> 0.25 0.5
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 90 ±
> -0.5 -0.25
> 0
> -0.10 00.10
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.12 00.12
> ER0(μ)
> -0.50 -0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
> Ed (%)
> AM Ed(%)
> M= 1 :19 M¯,Req = 13 :75 km ,º= 200 Hz ,³= 0 :128 ,²= 0 :026
> Á(radians)
> μ (radians) 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> 0
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> ¼
> i= 0 ±
> 00.2 0.4 0.6
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 45 ±
> -0.4 -0.2
> 0
> 0.2 0.4
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 90 ±
> -0.4 -0.2
> 0
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 -0.25 00.25
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.16 00.16
> ER0(μ)
> -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
> Ed (%)
> PVLS Ed(%)
> M= 1 :19 M¯,Req = 13 :75 km ,º= 200 Hz ,³= 0 :128 ,²= 0 :026
> Á(radians)
> μ (radians)

FIG. 7. Example EdΩ maps over the neutron star surface for a spin frequency of 200 Hz. These represent a slow-rotation (low ϵ) case constructed with EOS CMF2. For each plot, θ is the colatitude, ϕ is the longitude, and the yellow dot represents the location of the distant observer relative to the angular coordinates of the surface of the star. The first three panels of each row are EdΩ surface maps at different inclinations; the fourth panel is the error in the radius in percentage relative to the RNS 

surface; and the fifth is the normalized error in the radial derivative relative to the RNS surface. For each shape function, the color scale is set from the i = 45 ◦ panel and made symmetric about zero using the larger absolute value of the 5th and 95th percentiles; the same scale is used for all three inclination panels in that row. The white no-data regions are the far side of the neutron star where no photons manage to make it to the observer. The top row is an example of the AM shape function, which for this ϵ retains an elliptical error profile. The bottom row is an example of PVLS’ irregular ’bump’ type error. Note that in the PVLS case, ER′ does not reflect the derivative of ER because R′ for PVLS is computed utilizing a separate neural network. Furthermore, the spike in the error close to θ = 0 or θ = π is due to an issue with the ANN described in Section III C. 

that the PVLS errors are about 50% larger at the pole at ER = +0 .16% and EdΩ = +0 .32% , respectively. At larger values of θ, both α and σ increase, leading to con-tributions from the projection error term given in equa-tion (43). Since M/R is small, the projection term is dominated by the ER′ term, which has the same sign as 

ER′ since cos λ = 1 . In the range of 0 ≤ θ ≤ π/ 4, the AM radius error decreases, while the radius derivative error is negative with an increasing magnitude. The interplay of these two terms leads to EdΩ decreasing to close to zero around π/ 4 for this example. This should be contrasted with the PVLS shape function, which for this star has an irregular bump error in ER that rises to close to 0.3% in this region. This leads to a larger error of approximately 0.4% in EdΩ in this region. Moving closer to the equator from π/ 4 ≤ θ ≤ π/ 2,the AM function’s derivative error is negative, leading to negative error in EdΩ. The PVLS shape has much lower radial error closer to the equator, leading to smaller errors in the differential solid angle in this region. At this viewing angle, the limb, cos σ = 0 , corresponds to the largest value of θ. In the limit of the limb, the dominant term in the error comes from the error in the derivative at the latitude of the limb, which is positive in the southern hemisphere for the AM and PVLS shape functions. The general trends for observers viewing down the spin axis described here can also be seen in the left-most panels of the examples shown in Figures 8 and 9. 

2. Observer at i = 90 ◦

The case of an observer looking in the direction of the star’s equatorial plane is shown in the 3rd panel of each example, labeled i = 90 ◦, and depends on the longitude of the emitting region. The photons emitted directly to the observer from ϕ = 0 and θ = π/ 2 have α = σ = 0 ,so the error in the differential solid angle at this point 19 is simply twice the error in the radius. The three shape functions featured in these examples (AM, SPYY, and PVLS) are constructed to have zero error at the equa-tor, so the error EdΩ vanishes at this point for all cases and is small in the region near to this point, as can be seen in all of the i = 90 ◦ panels in Figures 7, 8, and 9. Due to the geometrical definitions, when the observer is in the equatorial plane, cos λ = − cos θ cos ϕ/ sin ψ. This means that cos λ has the opposite sign in the northern and southern hemispheres, so that the contribution of the radius derivative error to the solid angle error is symmet-ric through reflections through the equator, and zero on the equator. In the "front" side of the star (longitudes with ϕ ≤ π/ 2

or ϕ ≥ 3π/ 2), cos λ < 0 in the northern hemisphere and 

cos λ > 0 in the southern hemisphere (as can be seen from Table IV for the special cases of ϕ = 0 and ϕ = π). At ϕ = π/ 2 and ϕ = 3 π/ 2, cos λ = 0 .For this reason, both the radius and radius derivative errors lead to positive solid angle error for the AM shape on the side facing the observer, as shown in Figures 7 and 8. This is also true for the PVLS example shown in Figure 7, although the properties of the derivative error are more complicated. The far side of the star, π/ 2 ≤ ϕ ≤ 3π/ 2, has posi-tive cos λ in the north and negative in the south. The limb is confined to the far side of the star for this in-clination angle, so the sign of the error near the limb is given by the sign of the derivative error in the northern hemisphere. This results in negative error in the differ-ential solid angle in a circle around the eclipsed region for the examples in Figures 7 and 8. While the error pat-terns for the more rapidly rotating case shown in Figure 9 are more complicated, they can be understood using the same arguments.    

> 3. Observer at i= 45 ◦

The error patterns for observers with inclination angles at mid-latitudes are more complicated than the cases for 

i = 0 ◦ or 90 ◦. As a representative case, we have chosen to provide error maps on the example stars for an observer at i = 45 ◦. The sign of the contributions from the radius derivative error can be understood using the values of 

cos λ given in Table IV. Along longitude ϕ = 0 , the sign of cos λ changes at the colatitude of the observer ( π/ 4

in this case). Similarly, along longitude ϕ = π, the sign changes at the colatitude antipodal to the observer (at 

3π/ 4 for this example). In the region between the north pole and θ = π/ 4,there is very little dependence of the error on longitude, and the errors are very similar to the i = 0 ◦ panel for the slowly rotating star shown in Figure 7. At colatitudes in the range from π/ 4 < θ < 3π/ 4, cos λ is positive for all longitudes. Since the radius derivative errors are negative in the north and positive in the south, this leads to the errors in the solid angle having the same sign in the region close to the eclipse. The star used in Figure 7 does not have very strong gravitational lensing, so the region near the star’s south pole is not visible. It is useful to contrast this with the situation shown in Figure 8, which has a stronger gravitational field and a smaller eclipsed region. For the star in Figure 8, the region near the south pole with 3π/ 4 < θ < π is visible. For this range of latitudes, 

cos λ is negative near ϕ = π, leading to a large negative contribution to the solid angle error for light emitted near the star’s south pole.  

> 4. Errors in a NICER-like Rotation Powered Pulsar

The parameter estimation codes used to analyze the NICER observations of the RPPs make use of the AM shape function. Since the errors in the AM shape grow with spin frequency, it is useful to consider the most rapidly rotating RPP, PSR J0740+6620, in order to eval-uate the worst-case scenario. We constructed a star us-ing EOS HLPS2 with M = 1 .99 M⊙, Req = 12 .6 km, and 

ν = 348 Hz, values similar to the median values found in the analyses of NICER data [22, 23]. The AM shape function and its derivative shown in Figure 8 have errors that are ≤ 0.2% over the star’s surface. However, the regions near the limbs have EdΩ errors that are much larger. The observer’s inclination angle is known to be very close to i = 90 ◦ from radio observations [63, 64], so the third panel for the example in Figure 8 is the one that best represents this pulsar. The median locations and angular widths of the first of two spots inferred in reference [22] are shown as a green circle, along with hori-zontal lines showing the ±1σ locations of the spot center. Due to the similarity in latitude and uncertainties of the two hotspots, only one is displayed here for simplicity. The two spots inferred in reference [23] are slightly offset from these values, but their 1σ range of locations is very similar. We further show the differential solid angle errors as a function of pulsar phase for one of the hotspots modeled by [22] in the lower panel of Figure 8. As would be ex-pected, the errors for an infinitesimal spot located on the equator are minimal. However, spots located at the ±1σ

colatitudes travel through the region with the largest er-rors, which leads to the computed spots underestimating the differential solid angle by roughly 10% for about 20% of the star’s rotational phase. The ±2σ colatitudes (not shown in the upper panels) are much closer to the poles, where the errors are much smaller. Whether this amount of error seriously affects the ac-curacy of the equatorial radius estimate is a more com-plicated problem. The error estimates that we show here are for an infinitesimal emitting area. However, real-istic hotspots have larger angular extents, which tend to smooth out the effect of errors near the eclipses [91]. The predictions about the accuracy of the radius estimate from a Bayesian analysis require assumptions about the relative number of counts [49] due to the spot and the 20 ¼= 2 ¼ 3¼= 2                                              

> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> μ (radians)
> i= 0 ±
> 000.5 11.5
> Hotspot 1 ¡1¾
> Hotspot 1 Hotspot 1 +1 ¾
> ¼= 2¼3¼= 2
> Á(radians)
> i= 45 ±
> -1.5 -1 -1 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 00000.5 0.5 0.5 11.5
> ¼= 2¼3¼= 2
> i= 90 ±
> -1.5 -1.5 -1 -1 -0.5 -0.5 0
> -0.1 0.0 0.1
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.1 0.0 0.1
> ER0(μ)
> -1 01
> Ed (%)
> AM Ed(%)
> M= 1 :99 M¯,Req = 12 :60 km ,º= 348 Hz ,³= 0 :234 ,²= 0 :036 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Rotational phase ©
> -10 -5 0
> Ed (%)
> AM: Hotspot 1, μc= 1 :573 rad
> ¡2¾¡1¾median +1 ¾+2 ¾

FIG. 8. Top: Example EdΩ maps over the neutron star surface for a star with parameters similar to those inferred from NICER observations of PSR J0740+6620 [22, 23]. The neutron star was computed using EOS HLPS2, and the AM shape function was used to approximate the shape. The plots are constructed similarly to Figure 7, but the location of one of the inferred hotspots from [22] and its travel path as the star rotates are overlaid in green, along with the ±1σ limits on the center of the spots. The other hotspot is located at a very similar latitude and has similar uncertainties, but with a longitudinal offset, so only one is displayed for simplicity. Bottom: The error in the differential solid angle of the hotspot as a function of the rotational phase, using the i = 90 ◦ model. Curves of EdΩ are shown for infinitesimal spots located at the median, ±1σ, and ±2σ values for the spot’s location. The errors reflect the hotspots traveling horizontally across the i = 90 ◦ error map due to the spin of the neutron star, and can be considerable near the limb. The gray zones indicate regions where the median position of the hotspot is eclipsed at the back of the neutron star. 

background. Earlier work [50] compared the errors in equatorial radius resulting if a perfectly spherical stellar surface was assumed in the analysis of data for a star spinning at 600 Hz, with an extended hotspot, viewed at an inclination angle of 90 ◦, a case that would have much larger errors than what we show here. Their results (see Figure 2d of [50]) show a small bias in the estimated radius. However, it is also known that an incorrect esti-mate of the unpulsed background [20] can lead to a much larger bias in the inferred radius. In the flux computation, the differential solid angle is multiplied by the specific intensity of light emitted from the area. The atmospheres of the RPPs are usually mod-eled with a single-element atmosphere, such as Hydrogen [7], which is highly beamed towards the normal. Emis-sion from the limbs is then highly suppressed since the light is emitted nearly tangent to the surface. The situa-tion for the AMXPs is more complicated, since Compton scattering of photons can lead to anti-beaming [112]. Although it is not clear whether the errors caused by the shape function cause significant errors in the radius estimate, it makes sense to construct an improved shape function for future analysis of timing data. 

5. Rapid Rotation 

Some of the accreting ms-period X-ray pulsars and X-ray bursters spin more rapidly, with spin frequencies ranging from 400 - 600 Hz, as listed in Table I. The present versions of the codes used to analyze pulse pro-files make use of the AM shape. The AM shape function was tuned for use with the more slowly rotating rotation-powered pulsars with computations restricted to ϵ ≤ 0.1.Neutron stars spinning with frequencies close to 600 Hz will have larger values of ϵ, so the AM shape will likely be inadequate for the analysis of more rapidly rotating stars. In Figure 9, we show the EdΩ error map for one neu-tron star rotating at a frequency of 600 Hz and ϵ = 0 .224 .All three of the shape functions shown (AM, SPYY(s), and PVLS) have |ER(θ)| < 1% everywhere on the star. In the cases of SPYY(s) and PVLS, the shape function training data included values of ϵ as large as this star’s, and the maximum value of ER′ is similar to the maxi-mum value of ER. This should be contrasted with the AM shape function, whose construction did not include such large values of ϵ and whose maximum ER′ values are about 4 times larger than its ER maximum. The result for the AM shape is an error function with more oscilla-tions in sign than the SPYY(s) and PVLS functions, and larger errors in the EdΩ maps. The AM map for i = 90 ◦21 0 ¼= 2 ¼ 3¼= 2 2¼                      

> 0
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> ¼
> i= 0 ±
> 0510
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 45 ±
> -5
> 0
> 510
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 90 ±
> -10 -5
> 0
> 510 -0.80 00.80
> ER(μ)(%)
> -3.0 03.0
> ER0(μ)
> -10 -5 0510
> Ed (%)

AM Ed (%) 

M = 1 :55 M ¯ , Req = 14 :80 km , º = 600 Hz , ³ = 0 :155 , ² = 0 :224                            

> Á(radians)
> μ (radians) 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> 0
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> ¼
> i= 0 ±
> 0
> 2.5 57.5
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 45 ±-5 -2.5
> 0
> 2.5 7.5
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 90 ±
> -7.5 -5 -2.5
> 0
> -0.80 00.80
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.80 00.80
> ER0(μ)
> -7.5 -5.0 -2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
> Ed (%)

SPYY(s) Ed (%) 

M = 1 :55 M ¯ , Req = 14 :80 km , º = 600 Hz , ³ = 0 :155 , ² = 0 :224                            

> Á(radians)
> μ (radians) 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> 0
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> ¼
> i= 0 ±
> 0
> 246
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 45 ±
> -6 -4
> 0
> 246
> 0¼= 2¼3¼= 22¼
> i= 90 ±
> -6 -4 -2
> 0
> -0.60 00.60
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.60 00.60
> ER0(μ)
> -6 -4 -2 0246
> Ed (%)

PVLS Ed (%) 

M = 1 :55 M ¯ , Req = 14 :80 km , º = 600 Hz , ³ = 0 :155 , ² = 0 :224  

> Á(radians)
> μ (radians)

FIG. 9. Example EdΩ maps over the neutron star surface. These represent fast-rotation (higher ϵ) cases with EOS CMF2. The plots are constructed similarly to Figure 7. Notice that AM, now with a bloated mid-colatitude error, has a much larger ER′

and correspondingly larger EdΩ than expected from the 2ER area contribution alone. This may be contrasted with SPYY(s) with the same parameters, whose maximum ER(θ) is comparable in scale to AM but has a smaller maximal ER′ (θ) and a correspondingly smaller scale of EdΩ. PVLS is extremely similar to SPYY(s) in this example, but has a small spike in ER′

towards the poles due to the issue described in Section III C. 

shows two large lobes of large positive errors on the side of the star opposite to the observer. The SPYY(s) and PVLS functions have similar error patterns and magni-tudes, where most of the errors are concentrated along the limbs. Due to the large errors in solid angle shown in the AM error maps in Figure 9, we recommend that either the SPYY (with the appropriate coefficient set depending on 

ϵ), PVLS, or an improved shape function designed for rapid rotation be used for the AMXPs or other rapid rotators. 

6. Weighting EdΩ

EdΩ is computed at a point on the surface of the neu-tron star, but its contribution to the integrated projected solid angle Ωproj or flux FE is weighted by dΩ at that point. For example, near the limb, the local dΩ at each point is minuscule, but EdΩ is large. This raises the ques-tion of whether the error near the limb is an insignificant contribution to the overall error, the dominant effect, or roughly equivalent to the error contributed by the rest of the surface. Figure 10 examines this for a PVLS i = 45 ◦ case in more detail. The top-left panel repeats the percent error in dΩ shown in Figure 9. The top-right panel shows the 22 percent error in cos σ. These two panels illustrate that the large errors in dΩ seen near the limbs are mainly attributable to errors in cos σ. Farther away from the limbs, the error is close to the sum of 2ER and the error in cos σ.The bottom left panel plots dΩ at each point on the star. It is visibly skewed away from the limb, yet from prior plots we observe that the percent error relative to each point is most concentrated at the limb. The bottom middle figure illustrates the local differ-ence normalized by the average visible surface element, 

∆( dΩ) 

⟨dΩRNS ⟩vis 

= dΩsf − dΩRNS 

⟨dΩRNS ⟩vis 

, (44) where ⟨dΩRNS ⟩vis is the mean RNS differential solid angle over the visible surface. This plot reveals that the con-tribution to the total error in the solid angle is about as large from regions close to the limb as from those far from the limb. Nowhere on the surface can the error added to the overall solid angle be discounted. As an aside, the integrated projected solid angle 

Ωproj = R dΩ does not provide a useful quantification of the error. Using it, we run into two issues. First, the ultimate observable is the flux 

FE =

Z

> vis

Υ( θ, ϕ, . . . ) dΩ. (45) The intensity may vary by location on the surface, such as with hotspots or latitude-dependent tempera-ture changes. The dependence of the intensity on the emission angle with respect to the local normal also in-troduces dependencies on position. These effects must be multiplied by the differential solid angle at each loca-tion to obtain the correct flux. The total integrated solid angle is only meaningful in the context of uniform and isotropic emission intensity. Second, the integrated solid angle may be deceptively accurate even when the under-lying differential solid angle errors are not accurate, due to errors with opposite signs canceling. These cancel-ing errors may be visualized by summing up positive and negative error contributions seen in the bottom middle panel of Figure 10. As such, we have omitted any further analysis of this quantity.   

> V. CONCLUSIONS A. Main findings

We compared five shape functions against surfaces computed with RNS over a broad range of compactness and spin parameters. Despite all being built on the as-sumption of quasi-universality, the shape functions differ from each other and from the RNS surfaces. The mag-nitude, dependence on colatitude, scaling with compact-ness, and scaling with spin of their errors depend on the form of the shape function. MLCB, SPYY, and PVLS at moderate and large ϵ tend to produce smooth errors corresponding to surfaces that are more or less elliptical compared to the RNS surface, while BBPO and AM de-velop mid-colatitude errors at sufficiently rapid rotation. PVLS additionally develops irregular errors at small ϵ,as its training data omits part of this range. The corre-sponding errors in R′(θ) broadly follow these same mor-phologies, although PVLS is unusual because its deriva-tive is predicted by a separate neural network. Despite these errors, we find support for the assump-tion of quasi-universality. For each shape function, the extremal radius errors from different EOSs form a struc-tured surface in compactness-spin parameter space with-out visible dependence on the choice of EOS. A sim-ple correction in colatitude, compactness, and spin re-duces the errors in AM and SPYY(s) by approximately an order of magnitude. After correction, the bulk of the remaining errors between the 5th and 95th percentiles lies within approximately ±0.5% for AM, SPYY(s), and PVLS. Leaving each EOS out of the correction fit in turn and evaluating the errors on that excluded EOS produces very similar results. Some EOS-dependent offsets from zero remain, particularly for PVLS, so our results do not establish exact universality. These residual offsets may represent either limitations of the particular shape func-tions or a potential limit to the quasi-universality as-sumption. We analyzed the treatment of the polar radius in the PVLS shape function [42]. When the RNS -computed po-lar radius is supplied to the PVLS model, as in the orig-inal analysis, the ANN reproduces the remaining sur-face extremely accurately. However, the polar radius is not known independently in applications such as pulse-profile modeling and must itself be predicted from M ,

Req , and the spin. Using the PVLS analytical fit for 

Rpole increases the maximum relative surface error over their dataset from 0.25% to 2.77% . The error in the pre-dicted polar radius dominates over the error in the ANN reconstruction of the surface between the pole and equa-tor. This indicates that accurately predicting the polar radius, or equivalently the eccentricity, is one of the cen-tral remaining problems in constructing more accurate shape functions. We also explored the relationship between the radial error and the differential solid angle error within the con-text of the oblate Schwarzschild approximation. Within the regime where the Beloborodov approximation is ac-curate, the self-lensing and Jacobian terms cancel. The remaining error separates into an area contribution, ap-proximately 2ER, and a projection contribution. The projection contribution depends primarily on ER′ , since an error in the radial derivative changes the direction of the local surface normal. For photons emitted close to the radial direction, the projection contribution is small and 

EdΩ ≃ 2ER. Towards the limb, the projection contribu-tion is amplified as cos σ approaches zero. The resulting 

EdΩ depends on where that error occurs on the surface and on the viewing geometry. 23 ¼= 4                                       

> ¼= 23¼= 4
> μ (radians)
> Ed(%)
> -4 -2
> 0
> 2
> -4 -2 024
> Ed (%)
> Percent error in cos ¾
> -8 -6 -4 -2
> 0
> 246
> -8 -6 -4 -2 02468
> Percent error in  cos  ¾
> ¼= 2¼3¼= 2
> Á(radians)
> ¼= 4
> ¼= 23¼= 4
> μ (radians)
> Shape-function d
> 200 300 400 500
> 0100 200 300 400 500
> d SF  (10 ¡35  sr)
> ¼= 2¼3¼= 2
> Á(radians)
> ¢drelative to d®
> vis -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
> 0
> 0.25 0.5 0.75
> -0.75 -0.50 -0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
> ¢d = d ®
> vis  (%)
> ER(μ)(%) ER0(μ)
> -0.60 00.60
> ER(μ)(%)
> -0.60 00.60
> ER0(μ)
> Error in PVLS, i= 45 ±
> M= 1 :55 M¯,Req = 14 :80 km ,º= 600 Hz ,³= 0 :155 ,²= 0 :224

FIG. 10. Breakdown of EdΩ for one PVLS example relative to an RNS reference surface computed using the CMF2 EOS. For the three error maps, the color scale is symmetric about zero, with its limits set by the larger absolute value of the 5th and 95th percentiles of the data. Top left: percent error in dΩ over the visible surface. Top right: percent error in the projection factor cos σ, showing where surface-normal errors contribute to the local solid angle error. Bottom left: the shape function value of dΩ, which shows how strongly different visible patches contribute to the integrated solid angle. Bottom middle: ∆( dΩ) 

normalized by the visible-surface mean ⟨dΩRNS ⟩vis , showing the local error relative to a typical visible patch. The right-hand line panels show the corresponding colatitude profiles of ER(θ) and ER′ (θ), illustrating how radius and slope errors are reflected in the differential solid angle maps. 

This behavior is important even for neutron stars rotating at the frequencies presently observed by NICER. For our model with parameters similar to PSR J0740+6620, the AM errors in R(θ) and R′(θ) re-main below approximately 0.2% , yet the corresponding errors in dΩ become much larger near the limb. Hotspots placed at the ±1σ colatitudes inferred from NICER ob-servations pass through these regions and can have their differential solid angle underestimated by approximately 

10% over about 20% of the rotational phase. This does not by itself establish a comparable bias in the inferred radius, but it demonstrates that the shape of the flux may be altered and that sub-percent errors in the stellar surface may nonetheless result in far larger errors in the flux modeling. Our 600 Hz example further illustrates these effects: AM and SPYY(s) can have radius errors of comparable magnitude while differing substantially in 

R′(θ) and consequently in EdΩ.Finally, the large relative errors near the limb are not minimized by dΩ becoming small there. In the example examined here, the amount of the local error near the limb is comparable to that contributed by other parts of the visible surface when normalized to a typical visible surface element. At the same time, integrating dΩ over the entire visible surface can hide these errors through cancellation between positive and negative contributions. Since the emitted intensity need not be uniform over the surface, such cancellation need not persist in the ob-served flux. The integrated projected solid angle is a poor measure of shape function accuracy. The relevant errors must instead be considered locally through both 

R(θ) and R′(θ) and through their propagation into dΩ.

B. Limitations 

These conclusions apply to the five shape functions examined here: MLCB, BBPO, AM, SPYY, and PVLS. For SPYY, the slow and fast coefficient sets were treated separately. They also apply to the EOS sample described in Sec. II E. This sample includes a controlled soft-to-stiff sequence in the form of the HLPS family and several ad-ditional modern EOSs outside most of the calibration sets used by the shape functions, but it is not an exhaustive EOS survey. By the assumption of quasi-universality, and by our choice of a diverse set of EOSs spanning a realistic range of stiffness, we expect these results will generalize well. Nonetheless, a different EOS set could reveal behavior not captured here, especially if it occu-pies a poorly sampled region of compactness-spin space or manages to produce surface shapes outside the range covered by the present EOSs as run through RNS .24 The comparison was carried out over the parameter space described above. For differential solid angle anal-ysis, we are further restricted in the compactness to 

ζ ≤ 1/3.52 . Above this compactness, Schwarzschild light bending can produce multiple images of the same sur-face region, which is not modeled by our NS-SWORD implementation. The RNS reference surfaces were generated for a range of central densities, spins, and EOSs. The masses and radii emerged from this computation, and then they were compared to the literature shape functions at the same model parameters. The results therefore depend on the accuracy of the RNS surfaces, the interpolation onto the colatitude grid, and the density of the model sampling. The propagation into dΩ was calculated within the oblate Schwarzschild approximation. This lets us isolate the effect of replacing the RNS reference model for a given EOS with a shape function while computing the overall result in Schwarzschild spacetime. It does not include the full spacetime of a rotating neutron star, including frame dragging or the rotational quadrupole of the exte-rior metric. The analytic cancellation between the self-lensing and Jacobian terms uses the Beloborodov approximation. The cancellation is useful only where the local compact-ness is sufficiently low (approximately M/R (θ) ≤ 0.25 ). This work focuses on modeling the geometry. We com-pare errors in R(θ), R′(θ), and dΩ. We do not generate spectra, calculate the full flux, or carry out parameter inference for an inferred radius in this work. Our results show where shape function errors affect the flux calcu-lation. The size of the final observational bias will fur-ther depend on the temperature distribution, atmosphere model, viewing inclination, and details of the observatory which makes the observations.  

> C. Recommendations for Developing Better Shape Functions

Our results give us a basis to recommend future direc-tions for a better shape function. We suggest the follow-ing requirements: 1. Known quantities should be enforced within the functional form where possible. Any shape function should enforce known quantities, such as the equatorial radius, ideally within its functional form. As a counterexample, the MLCB shape function does not do this, and thus has con-siderable errors even at the equator. Such enforced quantities help to constrain the shape function and improve its accuracy. 2. The fitted parameter space should be well-defined and respected. Any better shape func-tion must have a well-defined parameter space and have a large dataset of neutron stars computed with a variety of EOSs across that parameter space. It should then be considered for use only within those confines. For example, PVLS was trained on 70 EOSs and approximately 4 × 10 4 rotating neutron star models, compared to the much smaller EOS collection available for the earlier MLCB shape function. Some of the largest errors found in this work occur when shape functions are evaluated out-side the parameter ranges used in their construc-tion. This includes AM at large ϵ, SPYY(s) beyond its slow-rotation range, and PVLS at very small ϵ

and ζ.There may also be value in constructing shape func-tions for particular applications rather than at-tempting to cover every possible compact star with one fit. SPYY was built with this intuition in mind, although this introduces difficulties in choosing the coefficient set appropriate for the context. A shape function could, for example, be fitted densely over a restricted range of compactness and spin rele-vant to a particular class of observed neutron stars, such as low-compactness, low-mass neutron stars. Bare quark stars may similarly require a separate treatment from hadronic neutron stars, since their surface shapes need not follow the same quasi-universal relation. 3. The polar radius or eccentricity should be modeled accurately. Modeling the eccentricity or the polar radius of rapidly rotating neutron stars accurately may be one of the key problems affect-ing the accuracy of shape functions. This is im-plied by the results of the machine learning shape function PVLS. It has a highly accurate surface fit given knowledge of the equatorial and polar radii. However, it is considerably less accurate if forced to model the polar radius using its polynomial fit. In our implementation, replacing the RNS reference polar radius that would not ordinarily be known ahead of time with this fit increases the maximum relative surface error from approximately 0.25% to 

2.77% . This suggests that improving the modeling of Rpole is a method to reduce the relative error to as low as 0.25% .4. Errors in both R(θ) and R′(θ) should be min-imized, and should vary smoothly with co-latitude. A better shape function should keep 

ER(θ) small over the colatitude-compactness-spin range relevant to observed neutron stars. The area term alone gives an approximate contribution 2ER

to EdΩ, even before the projection term is consid-ered. The requirements depend on the required ac-curacy of dΩ in the flux model. The shape function should also keep errors in R′(θ)

small. The differential solid angle depends on the projected area of each surface element. The pro-jection term depends on σ, the angle between the emitted ray and the surface normal. Since the sur-face normal depends on R′(θ), a shape function 25 with a small radius error can still produce a larger local error in dΩ, particularly towards the limb, if its derivative is inaccurate. The error in R(θ) should vary smoothly with colat-itude. A smooth one-sided error, such as a surface that is more or less elliptical than required, can be easily understood as an error in the coefficients of the shape function and potentially accounted for in corrections to analyses that utilized it. Sharp bumps, valleys, or irregular errors are less desirable because they are more difficult to account for in fu-ture corrections and can produce correspondingly complicated errors in R′(θ).5. Quasi-universality should be tested across EOSs. The errors should not appear to depend on the choice of EOS after the colatitude, spin pa-rameter, and compactness allowed by the EOS are accounted for. Our correction analysis supports quasi-universality over the parameter space exam-ined here: after correction, the bulk of the remain-ing errors between the 5th and 95th percentiles lies within approximately ±0.5% . Leaving individual EOSs out of the correction fit and evaluating the er-rors on the excluded EOS produces similar results. However, some EOS-dependent offsets remain, and a small number of rapidly rotating models have er-rors approaching ±4% . We cannot determine from this work whether these residuals represent a limit to quasi-universality or limitations of the particu-lar fitting forms. Future shape functions should be tested for their ability to generalize to EOSs not included in their calibration set. Beyond these requirements, the functional form should remain simple enough that its failures can be accounted for. A highly flexible fit, such as those created with ma-chine learning, may reduce the radius error, but if the remaining error varies irregularly over colatitude, then it becomes harder to know how the error will affect R′(θ),

dΩ, and the flux. That is, we wish for any errors to be small, smooth, and interpretable. It may also be fruitful to fit a correction to an existing good shape function, or recompute its coefficients, rather than constructing a new shape function from scratch. For example, the SPYY shape function [41] might be improved in range and accuracy by utilizing the polar radius or eccentricity polynomial from PVLS [42]. Al-ternatively, older shape functions might remain relevant as new calibration data become available by adding such correction surfaces. Shape functions are primarily empir-ical fits to numerically computed surfaces at this point, but a well-designed functional form may also align with and provide insight into the underlying physics of neu-tron star shapes. In this work, we have investigated the role of the shape function in the solid angle part of the flux calculation and shown how small errors in the stellar surface can produce considerably larger local errors in dΩ. We have not at-tempted to construct a new shape function. Developing new shape functions appropriate to the parameter ranges and accuracy requirements of particular modeling appli-cations is a natural topic for future work. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Craig Heinke, Gregory Sivakoff, and Shafayat Shawqi for many useful discussions about this research. This work was supported by NSERC Discov-ery Grants RGPIN-2019-06077 and RGPIN-2026-05707 awarded to SMM. JMN was also the recipient of NSERC CGSM and Alberta Graduate Excellence scholarships. 

> Appendix: Notation Translation for OS geometry

Several symbols used in the oblate Schwarzschild ge-ometry have not been used consistently across the litera-ture. We follow the angular notation used in the NICER code-verification paper [15] where possible, rather than the older notation of Morsink et al. [32]. The main ex-ception is the symbol ζ: in this paper ζ denotes the com-pactness parameter used in the shape function fits, while Bogdanov et al. [15] use ζ for the observer colatitude. We keep i for the observer inclination and write the local compactness as M/R (θ).              

> [1] M. Oertel, M. Hempel, T. Klaehn, and S. Typel, Equa-tions of state for supernovae and compact stars, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89 , 015007 (2017), arXiv:1610.03361 [astro-ph.HE]. [2] J. M. Lattimer, The Nuclear Equation of State and Neu-tron Star Masses, Annual Review of Nuclear and Parti-cle Science 62 , 485 (2012), arXiv:1305.3510 [nucl-th]. [3] L. Lindblom, Determining the Nuclear Equation of State from Neutron-Star Masses and Radii, Astrophys. J. 398 , 569 (1992). [4] L. Lindblom and N. M. Indik, Spectral approach to the relativistic inverse stellar structure problem, Phys. Rev. D86 , 084003 (2012), arXiv:1207.3744 [astro-ph.HE]. [5] A. L. Watts, N. Andersson, D. Chakrabarty, M. Fe-roci, K. Hebeler, G. Israel, F. K. Lamb, M. C. Miller, S. Morsink, F. Özel, et al. , Colloquium: Measuring the neutron star equation of state using x-ray tim-ing, Reviews of Modern Physics 88 , 021001 (2016), arXiv:1602.01081 [astro-ph.HE]. [6] F. Özel and P. Freire, Masses, Radii, and the Equation of State of Neutron Stars, Annual Review of Astron-

26 

TABLE V. Translation between the OS-geometry notation used in this paper and two common conventions in the literature. A blank indicates that the cited work does not introduce a symbol for that quantity.                                                                                   

> Quantity This paper Bogdanov et al. [15] Morsink et al. [32] Spin frequency ννP−1
> Angular spin frequency Ω = 2 πν Ω = 2 πν Ω = 2 π/P
> Observer inclination iζi
> Surface colatitude θθθ
> Surface longitude or phase ϕϕϕ
> Observer distance DDD
> Radial direction ˆr–r
> Surface normal ˆnnn
> Initial photon direction ˆk0–l
> Observer photon direction ˆk–k
> Radial–photon angle ααα
> Bending angle ψψψ
> Normal–photon angle σσβ
> Radial–normal tilt ττγ
> Local azimuthal angle λλδ
> Surface-slope factor q(θ)f(θ)f(θ)
> Combined projection factor P––Compactness ζ=M/R eq –ζ=GM/ (Req c2)
> Local compactness M/R (θ)RS/R ,
> M/R M/R (θ)
> Dimensionless spin ϵ= Ω 2R3eq /M ¯Ω2ϵ= Ω 2R3eq /M
> Lorentz factor Γγ–Doppler factor Dδη

omy and Astrophysics 54 , 401 (2016), arXiv:1603.02698 [astro-ph.HE]. [7] C. O. Heinke, G. B. Rybicki, R. Narayan, and J. E. Grindlay, A Hydrogen Atmosphere Spectral Model Ap-plied to the Neutron Star X7 in the Globular Cluster 47 Tucanae, Astrophys. J. 644 , 1090 (2006), arXiv:astro-ph/0506563 [astro-ph]. [8] A. W. Steiner, C. O. Heinke, S. Bogdanov, C. K. Li, W. C. G. Ho, A. Bahramian, and S. Han, Constraining the mass and radius of neutron stars in globular clusters, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 476 ,421 (2018), arXiv:1709.05013 [astro-ph.HE]. [9] M. Bauböck, F. Özel, D. Psaltis, and S. M. Morsink, Ro-tational Corrections to Neutron-star Radius Measure-ments from Thermal Spectra, Astrophys. J. 799 , 22 (2015), arXiv:1407.3277 [astro-ph.HE]. [10] K. G. Elshamouty, C. O. Heinke, S. M. Morsink, S. Bog-danov, and A. L. Stevens, The Impact of Surface Tem-perature Inhomogeneities on Quiescent Neutron Star Radius Measurements, Astrophys. J. 826 , 162 (2016), arXiv:1605.09400 [astro-ph.HE]. [11] C. Kazantsev, S. Guillot, L. Mauviard, T. Salmi, and N. A. Webb, Mass and radius measurements of the neutron star 47 Tuc X7: A new bias-free method, Astronomy & Astrophysics 710 , A334 (2026), arXiv:2605.28411 [astro-ph.HE]. [12] V. F. Suleimanov, J. Poutanen, and K. Werner, Obser-vational appearance of rapidly rotating neutron stars. X-ray bursts, cooling tail method, and radius deter-mination, Astronomy & Astrophysics 639 , A33 (2020), arXiv:2005.09759 [astro-ph.HE]. [13] J. Nättilä, M. C. Miller, A. W. Steiner, J. J. E. Ka-java, V. F. Suleimanov, and J. Poutanen, Neutron star mass and radius measurements from atmospheric model fits to X-ray burst cooling tail spectra, Astronomy & Astrophysics 608 , A31 (2017), arXiv:1709.09120 [astro-ph.HE]. [14] M. Cruise, M. Guainazzi, J. Aird, F. J. Carrera, E. Costantini, L. Corrales, T. Dauser, D. Eckert, F. Gastaldello, H. Matsumoto, et al. , The NewAthena mission concept in the context of the next decade of X-ray astronomy, Nature Astronomy 9, 36 (2025), arXiv:2501.03100 [astro-ph.IM]. [15] S. Bogdanov, F. K. Lamb, S. Mahmoodifar, M. C. Miller, S. M. Morsink, T. E. Riley, T. E. Strohmayer, A. K. Tung, A. L. Watts, A. J. Dittmann, D. Chakrabarty, S. Guillot, Z. Arzoumanian, and K. C. Gendreau, Constraining the Neutron Star Mass-Radius Relation and Dense Matter Equation of State with NICER. II. Emission from Hot Spots on a Rapidly Rotating Neutron Star, Astrophys. J. Lett. 887 , L26 (2019), arXiv:1912.05707 [astro-ph.HE]. [16] K. C. Gendreau, Z. Arzoumanian, P. W. Adkins, C. L. Albert, J. F. Anders, A. T. Aylward, C. L. Baker, E. R. Balsamo, W. A. Bamford, S. S. Benegalrao, et al. , The Neutron star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER): design and development, in Space Telescopes and Instru-mentation 2016: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray , Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Con-ference Series, Vol. 9905, edited by J.-W. A. den Herder, T. Takahashi, and M. Bautz (2016) p. 99051H. [17] M. C. Miller, F. K. Lamb, A. J. Dittmann, S. Bog-danov, Z. Arzoumanian, K. C. Gendreau, S. Guillot, A. K. Harding, W. C. G. Ho, J. M. Lattimer, et al. , PSR J0030+0451 Mass and Radius from NICER Data and Implications for the Properties of Neutron Star Matter, Astrophys. J. Lett. 887 , L24 (2019), arXiv:1912.05705 [astro-ph.HE]. [18] T. E. Riley, A. L. Watts, S. Bogdanov, P. S. Ray, R. M. Ludlam, S. Guillot, Z. Arzoumanian, C. L. Baker, A. V. Bilous, D. Chakrabarty, et al. , A NICER View of PSR J0030+0451: Millisecond Pulsar Parameter Estimation, Astrophys. J. Lett. 887 , L21 (2019), arXiv:1912.05702 [astro-ph.HE]. [19] Y. Kini, L. Mauviard, T. Salmi, A. L. Watts, S. Guil-lot, B. Dorsman, D. Choudhury, D. González-Caniulef, M. Hoogkamer, D. Huppenkothen, et al. , A NICER View of PSR J0030+0451: Updated Constraints from 27 

6 yr of NICER Observations, Astrophys. J. 1005 , 201 (2026), arXiv:2602.23743 [astro-ph.HE]. [20] M. C. Miller, F. K. Lamb, A. J. Dittmann, S. Bog-danov, Z. Arzoumanian, K. C. Gendreau, S. Guil-lot, W. C. G. Ho, J. M. Lattimer, M. Loewenstein, 

et al. , The Radius of PSR J0740+6620 from NICER and XMM-Newton Data, Astrophys. J. Lett. 918 , L28 (2021), arXiv:2105.06979 [astro-ph.HE]. [21] T. E. Riley, A. L. Watts, P. S. Ray, S. Bogdanov, S. Guillot, S. M. Morsink, A. V. Bilous, Z. Arzouma-nian, D. Choudhury, J. S. Deneva, et al. , A NICER View of the Massive Pulsar PSR J0740+6620 Informed by Radio Timing and XMM-Newton Spectroscopy, Astro-phys. J. Lett. 918 , L27 (2021), arXiv:2105.06980 [astro-ph.HE]. [22] A. J. Dittmann, M. C. Miller, F. K. Lamb, I. M. Holt, C. Chirenti, M. T. Wolff, S. Bogdanov, S. Guillot, W. C. G. Ho, S. M. Morsink, Z. Arzoumanian, and K. C. Gendreau, A More Precise Measurement of the Radius of PSR J0740+6620 Using Updated NICER Data, As-trophys. J. 974 , 295 (2024), arXiv:2406.14467 [astro-ph.HE]. [23] T. Salmi, D. Choudhury, Y. Kini, T. E. Riley, S. Vin-ciguerra, A. L. Watts, M. T. Wolff, Z. Arzouma-nian, S. Bogdanov, D. Chakrabarty, et al. , The Ra-dius of the High-mass Pulsar PSR J0740+6620 with 3.6 yr of NICER Data, Astrophys. J. 974 , 294 (2024), arXiv:2406.14466 [astro-ph.HE]. [24] T. Salmi, J. S. Deneva, P. S. Ray, A. L. Watts, D. Choudhury, Y. Kini, S. Vinciguerra, H. T. Cromar-tie, M. T. Wolff, Z. Arzoumanian, et al. , A NICER View of PSR J1231 −1411: A Complex Case, Astrophys. J. 

976 , 58 (2024), arXiv:2409.14923 [astro-ph.HE]. [25] D. Choudhury, T. Salmi, S. Vinciguerra, T. E. Riley, Y. Kini, A. L. Watts, B. Dorsman, S. Bogdanov, S. Guil-lot, P. S. Ray, et al. , A NICER View of the Nearest and Brightest Millisecond Pulsar: PSR J0437-4715, Astro-phys. J. Lett. 971 , L20 (2024), arXiv:2407.06789 [astro-ph.HE]. [26] M. C. Miller, A. J. Dittmann, I. M. Holt, F. K. Lamb, C. Chirenti, Z. Arzoumanian, J. Berteaud, S. Bogdanov, K. C. Gendreau, W. C. G. Ho, S. M. Morsink, P. S. Ray, R. A. Remillard, Z. Wadiasingh, and M. T. Wolff, The Radius of PSR J0437-4715 from NICER Data, As-trophys. J. Lett. 1000 , L48 (2026), arXiv:2512.08790 [astro-ph.HE]. [27] L. Mauviard, S. Guillot, T. Salmi, D. Choudhury, B. Dorsman, D. González-Caniulef, M. Hoogkamer, D. Huppenkothen, C. Kazantsev, Y. Kini, et al. , A NICER View of the 1.4 M ⊙ Edge-on Pulsar PSR J0614-3329, Astrophys. J. 995 , 60 (2025), arXiv:2506.14883 [astro-ph.HE]. [28] A. Li, A. L. Watts, G. Zhang, S. Guillot, Y. Xu, A. Santangelo, S. Zane, H. Feng, S.-N. Zhang, M. Ge, 

et al. , Dense matter in neutron stars with eXTP, Science China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy 68 , 119503 (2025), arXiv:2506.08104 [astro-ph.HE]. [29] K. Chen and J. Shaham, Pulse Sharpness and Asym-metry in Millisecond Pulsars, Astrophys. J. 339 , 279 (1989). [30] T. M. Braje, R. W. Romani, and K. P. Rauch, Light Curves of Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 531 , 447 (2000), arXiv:astro-ph/0004411 [astro-ph]. [31] C. Cadeau, S. M. Morsink, D. Leahy, and S. S. Camp-bell, Light Curves for Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 654 , 458 (2007), arXiv:astro-ph/0609325 [astro-ph]. [32] S. M. Morsink, D. A. Leahy, C. Cadeau, and J. Braga, The Oblate Schwarzschild Approximation for Light Curves of Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 663 , 1244 (2007), arXiv:astro-ph/0703123 [astro-ph]. [33] M. C. Miller and F. K. Lamb, Bounds on the Compact-ness of Neutron Stars from Brightness Oscillations dur-ing X-Ray Bursts, Astrophys. J. Lett. 499 , L37 (1998), arXiv:astro-ph/9711325 [astro-ph]. [34] J. Poutanen and M. Gierliński, On the nature of the X-ray emission from the accreting millisecond pulsar SAX J1808.4-3658, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronom-ical Society 343 , 1301 (2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0303084 [astro-ph]. [35] P. Pihajoki, M. Mannerkoski, J. Nättilä, and P. H. Jo-hansson, General Purpose Ray Tracing and Polarized Radiative Transfer in General Relativity, Astrophys. J. 

863 , 8 (2018), arXiv:1804.04670 [astro-ph.HE]. [36] J. Nättilä and P. Pihajoki, Radiation from rapidly ro-tating oblate neutron stars, Astronomy & Astrophysics 

615 , A50 (2018), arXiv:1709.07292 [astro-ph.HE]. [37] G. A. Oliva and F. Frutos-Alfaro, Effects of the treat-ment of the mass quadrupole moment on ray-tracing applications for rapidly rotating neutron stars, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 505 , 2870 (2021), arXiv:2006.05948 [gr-qc]. [38] K. R. Pechenick, C. Ftaclas, and J. M. Cohen, Hot spots on neutron stars - The near-field gravitational lens, As-trophys. J. 274 , 846 (1983). [39] M. Bauböck, E. Berti, D. Psaltis, and F. Özel, Rela-tions between Neutron-star Parameters in the Hartle-Thorne Approximation, Astrophys. J. 777 , 68 (2013), arXiv:1306.0569 [astro-ph.HE]. [40] M. AlGendy and S. M. Morsink, Universality of the Ac-celeration due to Gravity on the Surface of a Rapidly Rotating Neutron Star, Astrophys. J. 791 , 78 (2014), arXiv:1404.0609 [astro-ph.HE]. [41] H. O. Silva, G. Pappas, N. Yunes, and K. Yagi, Sur-face of rapidly-rotating neutron stars: Implications to neutron star parameter estimation, Phys. Rev. D 103 ,063038 (2021), arXiv:2008.05565 [astro-ph.HE]. [42] G. Papigkiotis, G. Vardakas, A. Likas, and N. Ster-gioulas, Universal description of a neutron star’s surface and its key global properties: A machine learning ap-proach for nonrotating and rapidly rotating stellar mod-els, Phys. Rev. D 111 , 083056 (2025), arXiv:2501.18544 [astro-ph.HE]. [43] Z. Jakab and S. M. Morsink, Gravitational Redshift for Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 994 , 163 (2025), arXiv:2507.02234 [astro-ph.HE]. [44] W. C. G. Ho and D. Lai, Atmospheres and spectra of strongly magnetized neutron stars, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 327 , 1081 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/0104199 [astro-ph]. [45] M. Bauböck, D. Psaltis, and F. Özel, Atmospheric Structure and Radiation Pattern for Neutron-star Po-lar Caps Heated by Magnetospheric Return Currents, Astrophys. J. 872 , 162 (2019), arXiv:1901.01274 [astro-ph.HE]. [46] T. Salmi, V. F. Suleimanov, J. Nättilä, and J. Poutanen, Magnetospheric return-current-heated atmospheres of 28 

rotation-powered millisecond pulsars, Astronomy & As-trophysics 641 , A15 (2020), arXiv:2002.11427 [astro-ph.HE]. [47] T. Zhao, D. Psaltis, and F. Özel, A Counterintuitive Correlation between Neutron Star Radii Inferred from Pulse Modeling and Surface Emission Beaming, As-trophys. J. 982 , 112 (2025), arXiv:2412.12284 [astro-ph.HE]. [48] T. Salmi, S. Vinciguerra, D. Choudhury, A. L. Watts, W. C. G. Ho, S. Guillot, Y. Kini, B. Dorsman, S. M. Morsink, and S. Bogdanov, Atmospheric Effects on Neutron Star Parameter Constraints with NICER, As-trophys. J. 956 , 138 (2023), arXiv:2308.09319 [astro-ph.HE]. [49] K. H. Lo, M. C. Miller, S. Bhattacharyya, and F. K. Lamb, Determining Neutron Star Masses and Radii Us-ing Energy-resolved Waveforms of X-Ray Burst Oscil-lations, Astrophys. J. 776 , 19 (2013), arXiv:1304.2330 [astro-ph.HE]. [50] M. C. Miller and F. K. Lamb, Determining Neutron Star Properties by Fitting Oblate-star Waveform Models to X-Ray Burst Oscillations, Astrophys. J. 808 , 31 (2015), arXiv:1407.2579 [astro-ph.HE]. [51] S. Bogdanov, A. J. Dittmann, W. C. G. Ho, F. K. Lamb, S. Mahmoodifar, M. C. Miller, S. M. Morsink, T. E. Ri-ley, T. E. Strohmayer, A. L. Watts, et al. , Constraining the Neutron Star Mass-Radius Relation and Dense Mat-ter Equation of State with NICER. III. Model Descrip-tion and Verification of Parameter Estimation Codes, Astrophys. J. Lett. 914 , L15 (2021), arXiv:2104.06928 [astro-ph.HE]. [52] E. Bootsma, S. Vinciguerra, A. L. Watts, Y. Kini, and T. Salmi, Scaling relations for the uncertainty in neu-tron star radius inferred from pulse profile modelling: the effect of spin rate, Monthly Notices of the Royal As-tronomical Society 537 , 3769 (2025), arXiv:2502.07471 [astro-ph.HE]. [53] https://github.com/John-Ming-Ngo/NS-SWORD .[54] J. M. Bardeen and R. V. Wagoner, Relativistic Disks. I. Uniform Rotation, Astrophys. J. 167 , 359 (1971). [55] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, Grav-itation (Freeman and Co., 1973). [56] S. Bonazzola, E. Gourgoulhon, and J.-A. Marck, Nu-merical approach for high precision 3D relativistic star models, Phys. Rev. D 58 , 104020 (1998), arXiv:astro-ph/9803086 [astro-ph]. [57] N. Stergioulas and J. L. Friedman, Comparing Models of Rapidly Rotating Relativistic Stars Constructed by Two Numerical Methods, Astrophys. J. 444 , 306 (1995), arXiv:astro-ph/9411032 [astro-ph]. [58] T. Nozawa, N. Stergioulas, E. Gourgoulhon, and Y. Eriguchi, Construction of highly accurate models of rotating neutron stars - comparison of three different numerical schemes, Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 132 ,431 (1998), arXiv:gr-qc/9804048 [gr-qc]. [59] https://github.com/rns-alberta/rns .[60] H. Komatsu, Y. Eriguchi, and I. Hachisu, Rapidly ro-tating general relativistic stars. I - Numerical method and its application to uniformly rotating polytropes, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 237 ,355 (1989). [61] G. B. Cook, S. L. Shapiro, and S. A. Teukolsky, Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars in General Relativity: Realistic Equations of State, Astrophys. J. 424 , 823 (1994). [62] J. G. Martinez, K. Stovall, P. C. C. Freire, J. S. Deneva, F. A. Jenet, M. A. McLaughlin, M. Bagchi, S. D. Bates, and A. Ridolfi, Pulsar J0453+1559: A Double Neutron Star System with a Large Mass Asymmetry, Astrophys. J. 812 , 143 (2015), arXiv:1509.08805 [astro-ph.HE]. [63] H. T. Cromartie, E. Fonseca, S. M. Ransom, P. B. De-morest, Z. Arzoumanian, H. Blumer, P. R. Brook, M. E. DeCesar, T. Dolch, J. A. Ellis, et al. , Relativistic shapiro delay measurements of an extremely massive millisecond pulsar, Nature Astronomy 4, 72–76 (2019). [64] E. Fonseca, H. T. Cromartie, T. T. Pennucci, P. S. Ray, A. Y. Kirichenko, S. M. Ransom, P. B. Demorest, I. H. Stairs, Z. Arzoumanian, L. Guillemot, et al. , Refined Mass and Geometric Measurements of the High-mass PSR J0740+6620, Astrophys. J. Lett. 915 , L12 (2021), arXiv:2104.00880 [astro-ph.HE]. [65] R. W. Romani, D. Kandel, A. V. Filippenko, T. G. Brink, and W. Zheng, PSR J0952-0607: The Fastest and Heaviest Known Galactic Neutron Star, Astrophys. J. Lett. 934 , L17 (2022), arXiv:2207.05124 [astro-ph.HE]. [66] A. Papitto, T. Di Salvo, L. Burderi, T. M. Belloni, L. Stella, E. Bozzo, A. D’Aì, C. Ferrigno, R. Iaria, S. Motta, A. Riggio, and A. Tramacere, The pulse pro-file and spin evolution of the accreting pulsar in Terzan 5, IGR J17480-2446, during its 2010 outburst, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 423 , 1178 (2012), arXiv:1203.4096 [astro-ph.HE]. [67] D. J. Reardon, M. Bailes, R. M. Shannon, C. Flynn, J. Askew, N. D. R. Bhat, Z.-C. Chen, M. Curyło, Y. Feng, G. B. Hobbs, et al. , The Neutron Star Mass, Distance, and Inclination from Precision Timing of the Brilliant Millisecond Pulsar J0437-4715, Astrophys. J. Lett. 971 , L18 (2024), arXiv:2407.07132 [astro-ph.HE]. [68] S. M. Ransom, P. S. Ray, F. Camilo, M. S. E. Roberts, Ö. Çelik, M. T. Wolff, C. C. Cheung, M. Kerr, T. Pen-nucci, M. E. DeCesar, et al. , Three Millisecond Pulsars in Fermi LAT Unassociated Bright Sources, Astrophys. J. Lett. 727 , L16 (2011), arXiv:1012.2862 [astro-ph.HE]. [69] M. T. Miles, R. M. Shannon, D. J. Reardon, M. Bailes, D. J. Champion, M. Geyer, P. Gitika, K. Grunthal, M. J. Keith, M. Kramer, et al. , The MeerKAT Pulsar Timing Array: the 4.5-yr data release and the noise and stochastic signals of the millisecond pulsar population, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 536 ,1467 (2025), arXiv:2412.01148 [astro-ph.HE]. [70] R. Wijnands and M. van der Klis, A millisecond pulsar in an X-ray binary system, Nature (London) 394 , 344 (1998). [71] P. Casella, D. Altamirano, A. Patruno, R. Wijnands, and M. van der Klis, Discovery of Coherent Millisec-ond X-Ray Pulsations in Aquila X-1, Astrophys. J. Lett. 

674 , L41 (2008), arXiv:0708.1110 [astro-ph]. [72] Z. Li, W. Yu, Y. Lu, Y. Pan, and M. Falanga, Discovery of a 584.65 Hz Burst Oscillation in the Low-mass X-Ray Binary 4U 1730-22, Astrophys. J. 935 , 123 (2022), arXiv:2205.12037 [astro-ph.HE]. [73] J. Strader, S. Swihart, L. Chomiuk, A. Bahramian, C. Britt, C. C. Cheung, K. Dage, J. Halpern, K.-L. Li, R. P. Mignani, J. A. Orosz, M. Peacock, R. Salinas, L. Shishkovsky, and E. Tremou, Optical Spectroscopy and Demographics of Redback Millisecond Pulsar Bi-naries, Astrophys. J. 872 , 42 (2019), arXiv:1812.04626 [astro-ph.HE]. 29 

[74] C. G. Bassa, Z. Pleunis, J. W. T. Hessels, E. C. Fer-rara, R. P. Breton, N. V. Gusinskaia, V. I. Kondratiev, S. Sanidas, L. Nieder, C. J. Clark, et al. , LOFAR Dis-covery of the Fastest-spinning Millisecond Pulsar in the Galactic Field, Astrophys. J. Lett. 846 , L20 (2017), arXiv:1709.01453 [astro-ph.HE]. [75] R. W. Romani, M. Beleznay, A. V. Filippenko, T. G. Brink, and W. Zheng, PSR J0952-0607: Tightening a Record-high Neutron Star Mass, Astrophys. J. 996 , 101 (2026), arXiv:2512.05099 [astro-ph.HE]. [76] J. W. T. Hessels, S. M. Ransom, I. H. Stairs, P. C. C. Freire, V. M. Kaspi, and F. Camilo, A Radio Pul-sar Spinning at 716 Hz, Science 311 , 1901 (2006), arXiv:astro-ph/0601337 [astro-ph]. [77] J. B. Hartle, Slowly Rotating Relativistic Stars. I. Equa-tions of Structure, Astrophys. J. 150 , 1005 (1967). [78] J. B. Hartle and K. S. Thorne, Slowly Rotating Rela-tivistic Stars. II. Models for Neutron Stars and Super-massive Stars, Astrophys. J. 153 , 807 (1968). [79] D. G. Ravenhall and C. J. Pethick, Neutron Star Mo-ments of Inertia, Astrophys. J. 424 , 846 (1994). [80] J. M. Lattimer and M. Prakash, Neutron Star Struc-ture and the Equation of State, Astrophys. J. 550 , 426 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/0002232 [astro-ph]. [81] W. D. Arnett and R. L. Bowers, A Microscopic Inter-pretation of Neutron Star Structure, Astrophys. J. Sup. 

33 , 415 (1977). [82] A. Akmal, V. R. Pandharipande, and D. G. Ravenhall, Equation of state of nucleon matter and neutron star structure, Phys. Rev. C 58 , 1804 (1998). [83] M. Alford, M. Braby, M. Paris, and S. Reddy, Hybrid Stars that Masquerade as Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 

629 , 969 (2005), arXiv:nucl-th/0411016 [nucl-th]. [84] B. D. Lackey, M. Nayyar, and B. J. Owen, Observational constraints on hyperons in neutron stars, Phys. Rev. D 

73 , 024021 (2006). [85] D. A. Leahy, S. M. Morsink, and C. Cadeau, Limits on Mass and Radius for the Millisecond-Period X-Ray Pul-sar SAX J1808.4-3658, Astrophys. J. 672 , 1119 (2008), arXiv:astro-ph/0703287 [astro-ph]. [86] S. M. Morsink and D. A. Leahy, Multi-epoch Analysis of Pulse Shapes from the Neutron Star SAX J1808.4-3658, Astrophys. J. 726 , 56 (2011), arXiv:0911.0887 [astro-ph.HE]. [87] D. A. Leahy, S. M. Morsink, Y.-Y. Chung, and Y. Chou, Constraints on the Properties of the Neutron Star XTE J1814-338 from Pulse-Shape Models, Astrophys. J. 691 ,1235 (2009), arXiv:0806.0824 [astro-ph]. [88] D. A. Leahy, S. M. Morsink, and Y. Chou, Con-straints on the Mass and Radius of the Neutron Star XTE J1807-294, Astrophys. J. 742 , 17 (2011), arXiv:1106.3131 [astro-ph.HE]. [89] M. Bauböck, D. Psaltis, F. Özel, and T. Johannsen, A Ray-tracing Algorithm for Spinning Compact Ob-ject Spacetimes with Arbitrary Quadrupole Moments. II. Neutron Stars, Astrophys. J. 753 , 175 (2012), arXiv:1110.4389 [astro-ph.HE]. [90] K. Glampedakis and S. Babak, Mapping spacetimes with LISA: inspiral of a test body in a ’quasi-Kerr’ field, Classical and Quantum Gravity 23 , 4167 (2006), arXiv:gr-qc/0510057 [gr-qc]. [91] M. Bauböck, D. Psaltis, and F. Özel, Effects of Spot Size on Neutron-Star Radius Measurements from Pulse Pro-files, Astrophys. J. 811 , 144 (2015), arXiv:1505.00780 [astro-ph.HE]. [92] P. G. Waldrop, D. Psaltis, and T. Zhao, Machine Learning Acceleration of Neutron Star Pulse Profile Modeling, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2506.11194 (2025), arXiv:2506.11194 [astro-ph.HE]. [93] M. Baldo, I. Bombaci, and G. F. Burgio, Microscopic nuclear equation of state with three-body forces and neutron star structure, Astronomy & Astrophysics 328 ,274 (1997), arXiv:astro-ph/9707277 [astro-ph]. [94] K. Hebeler, J. M. Lattimer, C. J. Pethick, and A. Schwenk, Equation of State and Neutron Star Prop-erties Constrained by Nuclear Physics and Observation, Astrophys. J. 773 , 11 (2013), arXiv:1303.4662 [astro-ph.SR]. [95] B. Dorsman, T. Salmi, A. L. Watts, M. Ng, A. Bo-brikova, V. Loktev, J. Poutanen, and J. Wilms, Pulse profile modelling of the accretion-powered millisec-ond pulsar SAX J1808.4 −3658 using NICER data from its 2019 and 2022 outbursts, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 545 , staf1983 (2026), arXiv:2511.07152 [astro-ph.HE]. [96] B. Dorsman, T. Salmi, A. L. Watts, M. Ng, A. Bo-brikova, A. Di Marco, D. K. Galloway, S. Guillot, M. Hoogkamer, Y. Kini, et al. , Pulse profile mod-elling of the 2024 outburst of the accreting millisec-ond pulsar SRGA J144459.2-604207, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2605.18731 (2026), arXiv:2605.18731 [astro-ph.HE]. [97] Y. Kini, T. Salmi, S. Vinciguerra, A. L. Watts, A. Bilous, D. K. Galloway, E. van der Wateren, G. P. Khalsa, S. Bogdanov, J. Buchner, and V. Suleimanov, Constraining the properties of the thermonuclear burst oscillation source XTE J1814-338 through pulse profile modelling, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi-cal Society 535 , 1507 (2024), arXiv:2405.10717 [astro-ph.HE]. [98] Y. Kini, A. L. Watts, T. Salmi, A. Bilous, S. Vin-ciguerra, S. Guillot, D. R. Ballantyne, E. Kuulkers, S. Bogdanov, and V. Suleimanov, Impact of accretion assumptions on pulse profile modelling of superburst os-cillations in 4U 1636 −536, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 541 , 46 (2025), arXiv:2506.03033 [astro-ph.HE]. [99] C. P. Lorenz, D. G. Ravenhall, and C. J. Pethick, Neu-tron star crusts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 , 379 (1993). [100] F. Douchin and P. Haensel, A unified equation of state of dense matter and neutron star structure, Astronomy & Astrophysics 380 , 151 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/0111092 [astro-ph]. [101] R. B. Wiringa, V. Fiks, and A. Fabrocini, Equation of state for dense nucleon matter, Phys. Rev. C 38 , 1010 (1988). [102] J. Negele and D. Vautherin, Neutron star matter at sub-nuclear densities, Nuclear Physics A 207 , 298 (1973). [103] V. R. Pandharipande, D. Pines, and R. A. Smith, Neu-tron star structure: theory, observation, and specula-tion., Astrophys. J. 208 , 550 (1976). [104] S. Typel, M. Oertel, and T. Klaehn, CompOSE Comp-Star online supernova equations of state harmonis-ing the concert of nuclear physics and astrophysics compose.obspm.fr, Phys. Part. Nucl. 46 , 633 (2015), arXiv:1307.5715 [astro-ph.SR]. [105] S. Typel, M. Oertel, T. Klähn, D. Chatterjee, V. Dex-heimer, C. Ishizuka, M. Mancini, J. Novak, H. Pais, 30 

C. Providencia, A. Raduta, M. Servillat, and L. Tolos, Compose reference manual (2022), arXiv:2203.03209 [astro-ph.HE]. [106] V. Dexheimer and S. Schramm, Proto-neutron and neu-tron stars in a chiral su(3) model, The Astrophysical Journal 683 , 943 (2008). [107] C.-J. Xia, T. Maruyama, A. Li, B. Yuan Sun, W.-H. Long, and Y.-X. Zhang, Unified neutron star eoss and neutron star structures in rmf models, Communications in Theoretical Physics 74 , 095303 (2022). [108] T. Kojo, G. Baym, and T. Hatsuda, Implications of NICER for Neutron Star Matter: The QHC21 Equation of State, Astrophys. J. 934 , 46 (2022), arXiv:2111.11919 [astro-ph.HE]. [109] A. Konstantinou, The Effect of a Self-bound Equation of State on the Structure of Rotating Compact Stars, Astrophys. J. 997 , 55 (2026), arXiv:2512.12298 [astro-ph.HE]. [110] A. Konstantinou and S. M. Morsink, Universal Rela-tions for the Increase in the Mass and Radius of a Rotating Neutron Star, Astrophys. J. 934 , 139 (2022), arXiv:2206.12515 [astro-ph.HE]. [111] A. M. Beloborodov, Gravitational Bending of Light Near Compact Objects, Astrophys. J. Lett. 566 , L85 (2002), arXiv:astro-ph/0201117 [astro-ph]. [112] A. Bobrikova, V. Loktev, T. Salmi, and J. Poutanen, Polarized radiation from an accretion shock in accret-ing millisecond pulsars using exact Compton scattering formalism, Astronomy & Astrophysics 678 , A99 (2023), arXiv:2309.02329 [astro-ph.HE].