Title: Pulse profiles of tall accretion columns in X-ray pulsars

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.32726v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 01:12:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Pulse profiles of tall accretion columns in X-ray pulsars 

Bagration Megrelishvili a, Pavel Abolmasov b

> aMoscow State University, Leninskie Gory, 1, Moscow, 119991, Russia
> bThe Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel

Abstract 

Accreting X-ray pulsars (XRPs) are strongly magnetized neutron stars (NSs) distinguished by a periodic variability pattern related to the rotation of their magnetospheres (pulsations). Many of these objects show complex asymmetric pulse profiles that are di ffi cult to explain in the framework of existing models. We calculate the pulsations of X-ray radiation from a magnetized NS in the regime of supercritical accretion, when the radiation shock wave is high above the NS surface, and the observed radiation comes from two optically thick accretion columns located downstream of the shocks. We show that the accretion column beam pattern calculated from the first principles has a potential of reproducing the variety of XRP pulse shapes. The surfaces of the columns are assumed to radiate locally as blackbodies with the temperature distribution following the solution of Basko and Sunyaev (1976). The adopted geometry of the field is an inclined dipole. It is taken into account that the two accretion flows above the shocks attenuate and scatter the radiation of the accretion columns. Using the ray-tracing technique, we obtain a vast variety of pulse shapes controlled by the mass accretion rate, magnetic angle, the direction towards the observer, and the parameters that determine the particular set of magnetic field lines being loaded with accreting matter. We propose a universal dimensionless parameter describing the asymmetry of a pulse quantitatively. The model naturally produces asymmetric pulse profiles observed in many XRPs. Its applicability, however, is limited to the brightest objects like pulsating ultraluminous X-ray sources and strong flares of Galactic XRPs. 

Keywords: accretion, accretion discs, magnetic fields, stars: neutron, X-rays: binaries 

1. Introduction 

X-ray pulsars (XRPs) are highly magnetized neutron stars (NSs) in binary systems. Despite these objects being known for around 50 years (Giacconi et al., 1971) and unambiguously identified as accreting NSs in binary systems, many details of their physics remain uncertain (see, for example, Mushtukov and Tsygankov, 2022). Accretion occurs either from the disc or the wind of the donor star, with higher accretion rates primarily achieved in the former case. The presence of magnetic field destroys the inner parts of the hydrodynamic accretion flow (disc or gravitationally captured wind) and creates a magneto-sphere with a characteristic radius estimated as the Alfvén ra-dius, where magnetic stresses exceed both dynamic and thermal pressure of the accreting matter. Within the Alfvén radius, the dynamics of the flow is governed by magnetic stresses. Con-sequently, the matter captured by gravitational forces is chan-nelled along the magnetic field lines, converging towards the vicinity of the magnetic poles. For low mass accretion rates, the observed emission comes from the regions where the mass-loaded field lines cross the NS surface (hot spots within the polar caps, see Laycock et al. 2025 and references within). If the energy flux released by accretion exceeds the local Eddington limit, radiation pressure becomes dynamically important and stops the magnetospheric flow above the NS surface in a radiative shock wave (see Inoue 1975 and Basko and Sunyaev 1976, the latter hereafter referred to as BS76). The optically thick subsonic sinking flow below the shock is known as the accretion column. The presence of coherent pulsations in XRPs suggests that the accretion flows and radiating regions on their surfaces are not axisymmetric with respect to the rotational axis. Even in the simplistic dipolar magnetosphere case, the magnetic and ro-tation axes of the NS are likely misaligned, which makes the accretion flow shape non-axisymmetric (Bachetti et al., 2010). This is especially true in the super-Eddington case when the observed radiation comes from multiple radiating surfaces. Real XRPs exhibit various pulse shapes that change on times longer than the spin period. Alonso-Hernández et al. (2022) provide a simple classification of pulse shapes based on the dominance of the first and second harmonic in the Fourier de-composition of the pulse. For certain objects, like 4U1901 +03, pulse shape types were observed to change. Interestingly, Alonso-Hernández et al. (2022) report no association between the pulse shape and luminosity or magnetic field strength. This suggests the presence of some hidden parameters that are, un-like luminosity or magnetic field, di ffi cult to measure directly, but nonetheless strongly a ff ect the observed pulse shapes. It is logical to associate these additional parameters with the geo-metrical properties of the accretion flows in the magnetosphere of the NS. One of them is magnetic angle χ between the mag-netic and the rotation axes. But there should be more degrees of freedom related to the shape and the orientation of the accretion flows. Most of the well-studied XRPs, including those undergoing super-Eddington flares, show noticeably asymmetric pulse pro-files. Pulsating Ultra Luminous X-ray Sources (ULXs) also arXiv:2609.32726v1 [astro-ph.HE] 26 Sep 2026 show asymmetries in their pulse profiles (Israel et al., 2017a; Poutanen et al., 2024; Israel et al., 2017b; Fuerst et al., 2017). Though these asymmetries are a challenge to some of the mod-els routinely used to interpret the observational data on XRPs, they are scarcely studied and lack a model-independent quanti-tative measure. We interpret the observed pulsations as one-dimensional scans through the neutron star’s stable beam pattern. This pat-tern is traditionally assumed to be axially symmetric around the magnetic axis, as in the Rotating Vector Model (RVM) (Rad-hakrishnan and Cooke, 1969). The RVM fails to explain the asymmetric pulse profiles of XRPs like Cen X-3. To address this, previous studies have often assumed non-dipolar magnetic fields to break the model’s inherent axial symmetry (e.g., Kraus et al., 1996; Sasaki et al., 2012). Alternatively, one can relate the asymmetry of the beam pattern with the asymmetry of the accretion flows. Misalignment of the magnetic and rotational axes creates preferential magnetic longitudes (Kulkarni and Romanova, 2013; Das and Porth, 2024), leading to lopsided streams even for moderate magnetic inclinations. In this work, we attempt to predict the observed features of the sources containing high accretion columns. Such columns exhibit a geometry where the beaming pattern becomes strongly misaligned with the magnetic axis (Miller, 1996). If the column is su ffi ciently tall, most of its radiation emerges well above the NS surface, allowing us to neglect both relativistic light bending and the extreme variations in scattering cross-sections expected in strong magnetic fields (e.g., Sokolova-Lapa, 2023). We cal-culate observed pulse profiles for a sample of models to probe the dependence of the pulse fraction, beaming factor, pulse-asymmetry degree (for which we propose a new metric) on the intrinsic model parameters and inclination of the observer. We also discuss whether the features typically observed from lumi-nous XRPs can be naturally obtained in the model of two tall accretion columns. In Sect. 2, we describe the model and the numerical algo-rithm. In Sect. 3, we present the results of our calculations, and discuss them in Sect. 4. We conclude in Sect. 5. 

2. Model description 

We develop a model calculating pulse profiles produced by two tall accretion columns within an inclined dipole magnetic field geometry. The radiation emitted by the columns is as-sumed to be locally blackbody, and we calculate the bolo-metric flux using the ray-tracing technique. To calculate the local intensities, we use the analytical solution for a steady-state radiation-pressure supported accretion column obtained by BS76. In the setting of BS76, the plasma in the magnetosphere is falling free along the field lines until it is stopped in a radia-tive shock wave above the NS surface. After passing the shock wave, accreting matter in this model is assumed to sink sub-sonically towards the surface, losing energy by the sideways di ff usion of radiation. The analytic solution of BS76 is well reproduced by time-dependent numerical simulations by Abolmasov and Lipunova (2023) (hereafter AL23) until the height of the column becomes comparable to the size of the magnetosphere or the flow be-comes highly super-Eddington. We follow the formalism used by AL23 for dipolar geometry and the shock location and ef-fective temperature distributions from BS76. If the analytical prediction for the location of the shock exceeds the inner radius of the disc, the shock position is assumed to coincide with the latter. 

2.1. Geometry of the flow 

Figure 1 illustrates the adopted configuration of the system. The rotation axis of the NS (set by the angular frequency vector 

Ω) coincides with the rotation axis of the disc. The magnetic moment μ is inclined at the magnetic angle χ with respect to ΩΩΩ.Two accretion columns are symmetrically positioned rela-tive to the NS centre. They are anchored onto the NS surface and curve along the dipole field lines. Each accretion column (shown in solid colours in Fig. 1) has two radiating surfaces: the polar one (yellow for the northern column, cyan for the south-ern) facing the closer of the magnetic poles, and the equatorial one (green for the northern column, red for the southern) facing the magnetic equator. Both columns start at the surface of the NS and extend to the shock front, following the dipolar field lines. Above the shock, accreting matter flows along the magnetic field lines with free-fall velocity, forming a funnel flow (here-after FF). The matter in this region can scatter and obscure ra-diation emitted by the accretion columns. FF is shown with a blue mesh in Fig. 1. For all the calculations, we use the reference frame co-rotating with the NS and a spherical coordinate system ( R, θ,

ϕ) with the polar angle θ counted from μ, azimuthal angle ϕ,and radius R (see Appendix A). Azimuth ϕ is counted counter-clockwise from the axis X, set by the intersection of the mag-netic equatorial plane and the plane set by μμμ and ΩΩΩ. Positive X

corresponds to the direction from Ω to μ and may be set by the unit vector 

eeeX = 1sin χ eeeμ × (eeeμ × eeeΩ) . (1) The accretion flow starts at the inner edge of the accretion disc (radius of the magnetosphere) R = Rm = 0.5RA , where RA is Alfvén radius defined as 

RA = μ2

2 ˙ M √2GM ⋆

!2/7

. (2) Hereafter we consider a NS with a conventional set of param-eters: mass M⋆ = 1.4M⊙, radius R⋆ = 10 km, and magnetic moment μ = 10 30 G cm 3, corresponding to B = 2 × 10 12 G on the poles. We assume that each column (and the corresponding part of the FF) has the azimuthal extent of 2 πa, where a ≤ 1. Accretion in the northern hemisphere occurs in the azimuthal range [ ϕ0 −

πa, ϕ 0 + πa], see Fig. 2. The azimuth of the column midline, 2χΩ μ

X(a) Θobs = 40 ◦χ X

Ω μ (b) Θobs = 140 ◦                 

> Figure 1: Sketches of the adopted geometry of the accretion flows from the points of view of an observer at inclinations Θobs =40 ◦(a) and Θobs =140 ◦(b). The geometry of the simulation is set by χ=20 ◦,ϕ0=60 ◦, and a=0.2. The surfaces of the northern accretion column are shown in red and yellow, of the southern accretion column, in green and cyan. The red and green surfaces are equatorial (facing the magnetic equator of the star), and yellow and cyan are polar (facing the poles). The fine blue mesh shows the funnel flow above the shock, following the dipole field lines. The black line shows the plane of the magnetic equator. The inner region of the disc is shown in brown.

Ω μχ

> πaπa

ϕ02πaX

> Figure 2: Schematic representation of the columns (without the disc and FF). The projections of the columns onto the magnetic equator plane (hatched) with the corresponding centre lines are also shown

free parameter ϕ0, takes into account the azimuthal shift of the flow with respect to eeeX .This shift may be considerably di ff erent from zero, as it was shown, for example, in numerical simulations by Kulkarni and Romanova (2013) (see also §4.4). One may consider this a simplified approach to the twist of the magnetosphere expected when the rotation frequencies of the inner disc and the mag-netosphere do not match each other. As we will show later in Section 3.6, ϕ0 aff ects the shape of the pulse and produces a large variety of pulse shapes even if all the other parameters are fixed. Its role is not equivalent to the phase shift of the pulse, as it described rotation around the magnetic rather than rotation axis. We assume that the matter enters the magnetosphere at the disc symmetry plane. For simplicity, we also assume that all the mass-loaded magnetic field lines reach the surface of the star at the same magnetic polar angle θ = θ⋆. For an inclined magnetic dipole, the magnetic surface with the same θ⋆ crosses the disc plane at di ff erent radii for di ff erent azimuths. This im-mediately raises the question about the range of radii within the disc that are pierced by the magnetic field lines with the same 

θ⋆. Obviously, the smallest radius should not be less than the radius of the magnetosphere. Constraints on a and χ are cal-culated in Appendix C. Therefore, we consider below mainly two values of the magnetic angle, χ = 10 ◦ and 20 ◦, see Ta-ble 1. This allows us to parametrize the mass-loaded field lines by the maximum extent radius Re (R = Re sin 2 θ along each of the lines) 

Re = R⋆

sin 2 θ⋆

= Rm

sin 2 θdisc 

, (3) where θdisc is the minimum magnetic polar angle of the magne-tospheric flow at its starting point (in the disc plane): 

θdisc =



π/2 − χ, |ϕ0| ≤ πa,

min {π/2 − arctan [tan χ cos ( ϕ0 ± πa)] } , otherwise . (4) The first case describes the scenario when the zero-azimuth di-rection ϕ = 0 is located within the magnetospheric flow. If the magnetospheric flow does not contain the zero-azimuth direc-tion, θdisc is equal to the magnetic polar angle of the disc plane 3Figure 3: Geometry of the magnetospheric section in the plane ϕ = 0 for the midline azimuth ϕ0 = 0. The radius-vector of length Rm connects the origin with the disc, shown as the light brown slab. The dotted lines are the rays of light from the accretion column. The transverse thickness of the flow δ(θ) is given by Eq. (5). Unlike the transverse thickness δ, the relative thickness of the flow along the radius does not depend on θ: ∆Re/Re = ∆ Rm/Rm, where Re is the maximum size of the dipole tube. 

at one edge of the column. The range of radii within the disc pierced by mass-loaded field lines is determined by the thickness of the FF. We define the accretion flow configuration by fixing its footpoints in the disc plane. Specifically, we set the funnel flow thickness in the disc plane to be ∆Rm, see Fig. 3. In the model we fix the value 

∆Rm/Rm = 0.25. The physical separation between the polar and the equatorial surfaces 1 is δ = δ(θ), and it is calculated from ∆Rm (∆Re): 

δ = Re sin 3 θ

√1 + 3 cos 2 θ

∆Re

Re

, (5) As a result, the mass-loaded magnetic lines cross the disc over a range of radii between Rm − ∆Rm/2 and Rm + ∆ Rm/2. The field lines formally extending towards much larger radii appear if the magnetic angle is large enough, that seems to be an issue likely to be resolved if the magnetic polar angle is allowed to vary within the polar cap. Simulations by Das and Porth (2024) indeed show that for large magnetic angles the shape of the polar cap is closer to an arc of the big circle with the magnetic polar angle approaching zero near its centre. 

2.2. Structure of the column 

Once the geometry of the magnetospheric flow is set, it is possible to use the equations from BS76 to calculate the posi-tion of the shock Rshock (their equation 34), luminosity of the columns Lx (their equation 37), and the e ff ective temperature distribution Teff (R) (see section 4.5 of BS76.) Applying an-alytical model of BS76, we evaluate their solution along the columns’ central line.   

> 1While the polar and equatorial surfaces are physically distinct, in the ray-tracing procedure we assume that they occupy the same geometric locus. Thus, one value of Redefined by Eqs. (3) and (4) determines all the four funnel sur-faces.

The model is initialized with the input parameters listed in Table 1. The dimensionless accretion rate is defined as ˙ m =

˙Mc 2/LEdd , where LEdd is the Eddington luminosity: 

LEdd = 4πGM ⋆c

κ ≈ 2 × 10 38 erg s −1, (6) and κ = 0.35 cm 2 g−1 is the Thomson electron scattering opac-ity for solar abundances, and ˙M is the accretion rate. The geometry-defining parameters a, ∆Rm, χ, and ϕ0 are converted into the corresponding BS76 model parameters l0 and d0 that characterize the accretion flow geometry at the NS surface. In Fig. 4, the shock height Rshock and disc radius Rm are plot-ted as functions of the input parameters ˙ m and a. For spherical radii, we use a normalized variable ξ = R/R⋆. As expected, the height of the column Rshock increases with the accretion rate and decreases with a. In Fig. 5 the total bolometric power Lx is shown against the same input parameters, ˙ m and a.

2.3. Processes in the free-falling flow above the shock (FF) 

The geometry introduced above suggests complex and vari-able visibility conditions for all the radiating surfaces. In partic-ular, one of the optically thick columns may obscure the other or a part of itself. The FF, if its optical depth is large enough, is also capable of obscuring column emission. It is probably fully ionized (see §4.5), which makes it an e ffi cient reflector in the X-ray range. In turn, the reflected emission may be ob-scured by the accretion flows and NS, making the pulses at high accretion rates a result of an interplay between various obscu-ration and reflection processes. Reflections may be multiple, especially for a ≳ 0.5, when a typical photon has a high proba-bility to cross a mass-loaded field line. Here, we stop after two steps: the column emission is complemented with the emission reflected by the FF above the shock wave. Visibility of both contributions is altered by the presence of the optically thick matter along the line of sight. Real columns are not radiating as local blackbodies: e ff ects of radiation transfer in the strong magnetic field and Comptonisation e ff ects need to be consid-ered to make reliable predictions of their spectral properties and beam shapes. Here we focus on the visibility e ff ects and bolo-metric intensities and leave a more elaborate analysis to future studies. If a beam emitted in the direction of the observer intersects the FF, its intensity is reduced by the factor of e −τ/ cos α0 , where 

α0 is the angle between the beam and the normal to the surface at the intersection point, and τ is the scattering optical depth along the normal (see Fig. 3). Transverse optical depth 

τ = κρδ = κ ˙Mδ

A⊥v , (7) where v = v(θ) is the velocity of the accreting matter along the field line, δ = δ(θ) is the accretion funnel’s width (Eq. 5) and 

A⊥ = A⊥(θ) is the cross-section of the accretion flow (of the two columns) 

A⊥ = 2 · 2πaR e sin 3 θ δ . (8) Assuming the velocity along the field in the FF equal to the free-fall velocity 4Table 1: Free parameters of the model. Stellar mass M⋆ = 1.4M ⊙, radius R⋆ = 10km, and magnetic moment μ = 10 30 G cm 3 are fixed. 

parameter values description ˙m = ˙Mc 2/LEdd 30 , 60 , 100 dimensionless accretion rate, in units 2 .2 × 10 17 g s −1

a 0.1, 0.2, ..., 1 azimuthal covering factor 

χ 10 ◦, 20 ◦ angle between the magnetic axis μ and the rotation axis Ω

cos Θobs 0, 0.1, ..., 0.9, 1 cos of angle between the direction towards the observer and the rotation axis Ω

ϕ0 0o, 20 o, ..., 180 o central azimuth of the column (midline azimuth) 

v =

r 2GM ⋆

R , (9) we arrive at 

τ = κ ˙M √Re

4πaR √2GM ⋆

∼ 1.44 ˙M18 

√ξe

a ξ ∼ 0.32 ˙m √ξe

a ξ , (10) where ˙M18 is the accretion rate normalized to 10 18 g s −1, ξ =

R/R⋆, ξe = Re/R⋆ (see also equation 3 in Mushtukov et al. 2017). To calculate the scattered radiation in a simplified manner, we assume a central isotropic source with the luminosity equal to the total luminosity of the two accretion columns Lx, which is the total radiative power of the four surfaces of the two columns. The source illuminates the FF, whose surface elements re-emit coherently part of the incident flux. We assume that the re-flected intensity Irefl is isotropic: 

π Irefl = Lx

4πR2 cos α1 (1 − e−τ1 ) (11) where 

τ1 = τ/ cos α1 (12) and α1 is the angle between the normal to the surface element and the radius vector (see Fig. 3). Lx is calculated analytically according to BS76. In our approach, only the fraction 1 − e−τ1

of the incident intensity is reflected. We neglect the photons that pass through the flow after some, one or more, number of scatterings (see further discussion in §4.5).                   

> Figure 4: Dependence of the normalized magnetosphere size ξm=Rm/R⋆and shock wave position ξs=Rshock /R⋆on the accretion rate ˙ m.The magnetic angle χ=0o.
> Figure 5: Bolometric luminosity vs. accretion rate ˙ m.The lines show the analytic result of BS76, and symbols show surface black body flux integrated over the column surfaces according to Eq. (13). The magnetic angle χ=0o.

2.4. Observed emission 

We simulate the observed emission using the geometry and physics described in the previous sections. The observer’s po-sition is defined by the polar angle Θobs and the spin phase 

Φ = φ/ 2π, with φ denoting the azimuthal coordinate with re-spect to the spin axis of the star. Both angles Θobs and φ are measured in the spherical coordinate system set by the rota-tion axis Ω. The phase Φ = 0 corresponds to the configuration where the angle between the observer’s line of sight and the magnetic axis is minimal. A 50-point equally spaced grid in Φ

was adopted to sample one full rotation period. At a given time or spin phase, we calculate the radiation re-ceived by the observer. To do this, we integrate the intensity from the surfaces of the magnetospheric flow, taking into ac-count that some fraction of the radiation is eclipsed by the ac-cretion columns or NS, and some of the radiation is attenuated by the FF. For each of the four column surfaces, we use a 100 × 100 equidistant mesh in θ and ϕ. The same is done for the NS-facing, illuminated surfaces of the FF. Each surface element emits intensity independent of the direction within the relevant hemisphere. Thus, the total luminosity of all the four radiating surfaces (which depends neither on Θobs nor on the phase Φ)equals 

Lx = 4

> ϕ0+πa

Z

> ϕ0−πa
> θs

Z

> θ⋆

σT 4eff (θ) ˜ S dθ dϕ (13) and coincides with the theoretical prediction by BS76 with the 5accuracy better than 2%, see Fig. 5, for the cases when the pre-dicted height of the column is less than Rmag . The Jacobian of the mapping ˜ S (θ) of the spherical to Cartesian surface element is calculated according to Eq. (A.13). The isotropic bolometric luminosity of the two magneto-spheric flows received by an observer at a distance of d is 

Liso = 4π d2

Z

T I dΩ , (14) where I is the bolometric intensity, d Ω is the elementary solid angle from the point of view of the observer, and the integrals are taken over the four surfaces of the magnetic tubes. The multiplier T accounts for the eclipses and attenuation: 

T (θ, ϕ, Θobs , Φ) = feclipse (θ, ϕ, Θobs , Φ) · fattenuation (θ, ϕ, Θobs , Φ) .

(15) The factors on the right-hand side are calculated using the ray-tracing method described in Appendix B. The eclipse function 

feclipse is 0 when the ray towards the observer intersects the NS surface or an accretion column, and 1 otherwise. The degree of attenuation in the FF depends on the optical depth along the ray as 

fattenuation (θ, ϕ, Θobs , Φ) = e−τ/ cos α0 , (16) where α0 is the angle between the normal to the surface of the magnetic tube and the incident ray (see Fig. 3), and the trans-verse thickness τ is given by Eq. (10). We write below the integral over just one of the four surfaces of the magnetospheric flow. Substituting the solid angle d Ω = 

( ˜ S /d2) cos ψ dθ dϕ, where ψ is the angle between the normal to the surface element and the line of sight (see Eq. A.8) we obtain 

Liso = 4π

> ϕ0+πa

Z

> ϕ0−πa
> θdisc

Z

> θ⋆

T I cos ψ(θ, ϕ ) ˜ S dθ dϕ . (17) Intensity is calculated di ff erently below the shock and in the FF: 

I =



σ T 4eff /π, θ⋆ < θ < θ s

Irefl , θs < θ < θ disc 

, (18) where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, θs and θ⋆ are the polar angles at the shock and at the NS surface, respectively, and the reflected intensity Irefl is given by Eq. (11). In this work, to analyze the pulse profile morphology, we use isotropic luminosity normalized to its maximum value within each pulse ˜ Liso :˜Liso = Liso 

max  

> Φ

Liso 

. (19) Additionally, as an integral characteristic of the source’s en-ergy output, we will use the phase-averaged luminosity ⟨Liso ⟩:

⟨Liso ⟩ =

> 1

Z

> 0

Liso dΦ (20) 

2.5. Symmetry properties of the model and beam pattern 

The model described in the previous subsections allows one to calculate isotropic luminosities as functions of the relative orientation of the observer set by angles Θobs and φ. By fix-ing Θobs and considering φ as a function of the spin phase Φ,one obtains the pulse profile from the beam pattern. This is a commonly used approach both for rotationally and accretion-powered pulsars, valid whenever the beam pattern of the source is stable on the time scales of the spin. The properties of the beam determine the properties of the pulse. For instance, a compact hot spot on the surface of a slowly rotating NS 2 pro-duces a beam pattern consistent with the RVM. Broadly viewed, RVM (Radhakrishnan and Cooke, 1969) is a beam-pattern model with an infinite-order axis of symmetry, that is identified with the magnetic axis. All the pulse profiles in this case are symmetric: mapping Φ → − Φ reproduces the shape of the pulse. If this axial symmetry is relaxed, the pulses may become asymmetric, depending on the symmetry proper-ties of the beam. Our model, and thus its beam pattern, has two independent symmetry elements. First is central symmetry, that in terms of coordinate mapping corresponds to invariance under the simul-taneous transform Φ → Φ + 0.5 and Θobs → π − Θobs . This transform swaps the two polar caps, the corresponding accre-tion columns and the funnel flows. The second symmetry ele-ment is mirror reflection with respect to the plane containing the magnetic axis and the middle line of the flow ( ϕ → 2ϕ0 − ϕ). 3

We call this plane the accretion columns’ symmetry plane .

3. Results 

We have developed a model that calculates the observed pulse profiles for a specific pulsar configuration. Each rota-tional phase corresponds to a specific line-of-sight direction toward the observer and sets the picture plane. Our model projects the surface elements of the columns and the FF onto the picture plane and integrates their intensity over the solid an-gle, taking into account visibility conditions, occultation and attenuation. We also perform a statistical analysis of the entire dataset of the simulation results generated by our model across a grid of input parameters. The input parameter sets are constructed as the Cartesian product of individual parameter grids. The view-ing angle grid, Θobs , is assumed to be uniform in cos Θobs , while the remaining parameters are set by linear uniform grids. The adopted parameter grids may be found in Table 1.  

> 2There is a relativistic Doppler boost correction term important for rapidly rotating pulsars (Braje et al., 2000) which makes the profiles asymmetric for spin periods of the order milliseconds.
> 3Together, these two elements produce the group of symmetry C 2hconsist-ing of a second-order axis of rotation (orthogonal to the magnetic axis) and a symmetry plane perpendicular to this axis (see for instance Landau and Lifshitz 1981, chapter XII).

6Φ = 0 Φ = 0.12 Φ = 0.25 Φ = 0.38 Φ = 0.5 Φ = 0.62 Φ = 0.75 Φ = 0.88                   

> Figure 6: Example of a pulse profile for μ30 =1, Θobs =80 o,χ=40 o, ˙ m=100, a=0.2, ϕ0=40 owith the contributions of di ff erent radiating surfaces shown separately. The auxiliary upper panels show the 3D renderings of the columns as seen by the observer on di ff erent spin phases. The colouring of the surfaces follows the conventions of Fig. 1.

3.1. Pulse profile 

Figure 6 shows an example of a pulse profile with the con-tributions from the radiating surfaces of the accretion columns and reflecting FF surfaces. In the auxiliary panels above, we show the 3D-renderings of the columns for an observer at the same Θobs = 80° for di ff erent phases Φ.The peaks of the fluxes from specific surfaces are primar-ily associated with their favourable orientation relative to the line of sight. E ff ective temperature gradients make the contri-butions of di ff erent parts of the columns unequal. For example, at Φ = 0, the narrow visible section in the vicinity of the NS of the northern equatorial surface (red) emits a flux comparable in magnitude to that from the much larger visible area of the northern polar surface (yellow). Figure 6 clearly demonstrates the influence of attenuation on the pulse shape. In particular, the sharp drop of the flux from the north equatorial surface (solid red line) at Φ ∼ 0.85 is due to its self-attenuation. At about the same phase, the south polar (cyan dotted line) surface starts to be eclipsed by the NS and northern column. For the configuration we show, several per cent of the observed radiation is reflected by FF, but di ff erent configurations may have much larger reflected radiation contri-butions. Attenuation and reflection by FF significantly a ff ect the pulse fraction (PF), defined as PF =

max  

> Φ

(Liso ) − min  

> Φ

(Liso )max  

> Φ

(Liso ) + min  

> Φ

(Liso ) , (21) where the maximum and minimum are calculated for one rota-tion period. The role of attenuation and reflection will be con-sidered in detail in Section 3.4. 

3.2. Sky maps 

A useful tool for displaying the variety of pulse profiles is a sky map. Sky map is a representation of the beam pattern of the source in the coordinates of the observer’s inclination Θobs and the spin phase Φ. Each horizontal cross-section of a sky map is the pulse profile measured by the observer at the corresponding 

Θobs . Figure 7 shows a sample of sky maps with di ff erent values of a and ϕ0. The colour-coded bolometric isotropic luminosity 

Liso is calculated according to Eq. (17) and normalized by the power of the columns Lx. For all the panels in Fig. 7, the ac-cretion rate ˙ m is the same, but Lx is di ff erent as it depends on 

a. Stars in Fig. 7 indicate the position of the north and south magnetic poles. The isotropic luminosity variations in all the sky maps are a combination of two di ff erent e ff ects. The smooth changes result from gradual changes in the visible radiating areas, while the rapid changes come mostly from eclipses or attenuation in the FF. 7(a) χ = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.2, ϕ0 = 0◦ (b) χ = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.5, ϕ0 = 0◦ (c) χ = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.7, ϕ0 = 0◦                                                                                                         

> (d) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.2, ϕ0=20 ◦(e) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.5, ϕ0=20 ◦(f) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, ϕ0=20 ◦
> (g) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.2, ϕ0=40 ◦(h) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.5, ϕ0=40 ◦(i) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, ϕ0=40 ◦
> (j) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.2, ϕ0=60 ◦(k) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.5, ϕ0=60 ◦(l) χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, ϕ0=60 ◦

Figure 7: Sky maps of the normalized isotropic luminosity, colour coded. The isotropic luminosity is normalized by the columns’ power Lx calculated according to Eq. 13. Stars indicate magnetic poles. 

In the right row of Fig. 7 the azimuthal filling a is the largest. For large a, changes related to FF attenuation a ff ect the largest areas on the sky map. Also, the column height is the smallest (see also Fig. 4), that makes the dark regions of the maps deeper and sharper. For ϕ0 = 0 and |Θobs − 90 o| ≳ 10 o, there is a single maximum at Φ ∼ 0 or 0 .5, depending on the observer’s hemisphere. For 

ϕ0 = 0, the pulse profiles are symmetrical with respect to the phase of the maximum or the minimum. For positive ϕ0, the maximum shifts to smaller phases, its position becomes depen-dent on Θobs , and the shape of the pulse becomes asymmetric. We will consider the asymmetries of the pulse shapes in §3.3 and the role of ϕ0 in §3.6. In Fig. 8, we show that even for zero magnetic angle χ =

8(a) χ = 0◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.2, ϕ0 = 0◦ (b) χ = 0◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.5, ϕ0 = 0◦ (c) χ = 0◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.7, ϕ0 = 0◦        

> Figure 8: Sky maps of the normalized isotropic luminosity (colour coded) for χ=0. The isotropic luminosity is normalized by the columns’ power Lxcalculated according to Eq. 13. Stars indicate magnetic poles. Section with Θobs =const gives a pulse seen by an observer located at Θobs .

0, the pulses are observed under the conditions a < 1 and 0 < Θobs < 180 ◦.

3.3. Asymmetry of pulses 

Unless the central azimuth of the column ϕ0 = 0 or ϕ0 =

180 ◦, the pulse shapes produced by our model are in general not symmetric, meaning there is no such value Φ0 that maps the pulse into itself with the Φ → 2Φ0 − Φ transform. This is clearly visible for larger ϕ0 in Fig. 7. To measure the asymmetry of some signal f (Φ), we propose the following metric 

A = min 

> Φ0∈Phase[0 ,1]

s 1R

> 0

 f (2 Φ0 − Φ) − f (Φ)2 dΦ

fmax − fmin 

. (22) For a uniform discrete phase coverage containing n equal phase bins, 

A = min 

> Φ0∈{ Φi}

s

> 1
> NN

P

> i

 f (2 Φ0 − Φi) − f (Φi)2

fmax − fmin 

, (23) where f is the pulse profile and the phase Φ0 ∈ [0 , 1]. The min-imal possible value of A is zero and is acquired only if the pro-file is symmetric. If a periodical function f (Φ) linearly depends on Φ for Φ = 0.. 1 (sawtooth profile), then A = (2 √3) −1 ≃ 0.29. The discrete nature of Eq. (23) creates a systematic error that makes A non-zero even for a perfectly symmetric profile. The irreducible error can be estimated by applying a phase o ff set to a symmetric reference pulse (we assumed a sinusoidal signal). Our evaluations confirm that this error depends on the number of grid points over the phase Φ as ∆A ≈ 2/N. For N = 50 points, ∆A ∼ 4.4 × 10 −2.When Θobs = 0, there are no pulsations (see Fig. 9) and A is not defined. Therefore, we remove this case from the analysis of the symmetry metric of the pulses, and from Figs. 10 and 11, which show the distributions in A for di ff erent ϕ0 and a. For the sample of models described by Table 1, 95% of metric values lie in the range between 0 and 0.236 (models with Θobs = 0 are excluded). Pulse profiles are symmetrical ( A = 0) in the following par-ticular cases: 

• The accretion columns’ symmetry plane contains the rota-tion axis of the NS. As demonstrated in Fig. 10, the metric 

A becomes zero when ϕ0 = 0o or ϕ0 = 180 o. At interme-diate ϕ0 values, this alignment is lost, allowing asymmetry to emerge. 

• Full azimuthal filling. When a = 1, the parameter ϕ0 be-comes physically meaningless as the column occupies all azimuthal angles. The system reduces to the ϕ0 = 0 sym-metric case, with the symmetry plane containing Ω, result-ing in zero metric values (see Fig.11). 

• Magnetic angle χ = 0. In this case, because the rotational and magnetic axes coincide, the parameter ϕ0 reduces to a pure phase shift. When a < 1 and χ = 0, pulsations arise due to the rotation of the column, whose projection onto the observer’s plane varies with phase.     

> Figure 9: Distributions of asymmetry Afor di ff erent Θobs . Individual violin plots show estimated probability density functions of asymmetry A. Dashed and dotted lines show the median and quartiles (25 and 75%) of the distribu-tions, respectively.

To illustrate the relation between the metric and the observed profile morphology, we apply it to a real source. We took the pulse profilve obtained by Tsygankov et al. (2022) for Cen X-3 in the 2 − 8keV energy range (shown in Fig. 12) and obtained for it A = 0.19 ± 0.025. The metric A is defined solely by the 9Figure 10: Distributions in asymmetry A for di ff erent ϕ0. All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9.    

> Figure 11: Distributions in asymmetry Afor di ff erent a. All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9.

pulse profile shape and can be applied to any observed profile, regardless of the source’s luminosity or energy band. 

> Figure 12: Normalized flux of Cen X-3 at 2-8 keV energy band.

3.4. Impact of attenuation and reflection by the optically thick FF 

In our calculations, the physical e ff ects that a ff ect the pulse shape can be enabled separately. The sky maps in Fig. 13 show the emission from the columns ignoring the impact of the FF (panel a), with the attenuation by the FF added (b), and tak-ing into account both attenuation by the FF and emission scat-tered from its surface (c). Comparing panels (a) and (b), we see that the pulse profile is strongly influenced by the attenua-tion of emission by the FF. Variations of the luminosity with the phase are the strongest in panel (b), implying that the attenua-tion drives the PF to high values (Fig. 14). Reflection makes the isotropic luminosity significantly higher (c). Compared to (a), the maximum flux is higher by 40%. The account for FF leads to especially high PFs at high observer angles than without FF. Reflection from FF, on the other hand, results in some decrease of PF, which is also visible in Fig. 14. If the accretion columns are su ffi ciently high, the eclipses caused by the NS are weak compared to the other visibility ef-fects. Fig. 15 illustrates the contribution of the NS eclipse that for typical parameter sets considered in this paper is about sev-eral per cent. When the base of one of the columns is obscured by the NS, this contribution reaches ∼ 16% when the observa-tion angles Θobs lie in a narrow interval of values. This has a minor e ff ect on the final PF (see Fig. 14, compare the dotted green and solid blue line). Thus, the relatively large spatial size of the columns, which is ξs ∼ 7 for the particular configuration, would allow us to neglect, to a certain degree, the occultations by the NS surface. The same reasoning may be used to jus-tify our neglect of the relativistic light bending e ff ects (see also §4.1). 

3.5. Impact of the azimuthal filling a 

The azimuthal filling factor a defines the phase ranges af-fected by eclipses and attenuation. This is demonstrated in Fig. 16, which displays how the pulse profile varies with chang-ing a. The configurations shown in the figure have values of 

Θobs = 20 o, 40 o, and 60 o, and ϕ0 = 0o, 40 o, and χ = 20 o.For ϕ0 = 0, FF attenuates the accretion columns in the range of azimuths from −πa to πa, or, equivalently, in the range of phases between −a/2 to a/2. As the value of a grows and ap-proaches unity, there is a growing range of phases where the entire column is attenuated by the FF. The pulse-averaged lumi-nosity ⟨Liso ⟩ Eq. (20) gradually varies with a and attains maxi-mum values for a ∼ 0.5 − 0.6 (see Fig.17). Configurations with a = 1 have symmetric pulse profiles (Fig. 18). The contours of constant angle θ (the polar angle counted from μ) illustrate that the configuration with the filled accretion columns is a kind of RVM model with the maximal intensity along the magnetic axis. Distributions of PF hardly depend on a, if a < 1 (see Fig. 19). For filled magnetospheres ( a = 1), the pulsations are sup-pressed for polar or equatorial observers (for our values of 

χ = 10 o and 20 o). Namely, the pulses are hardly seen for 

|Θobs − 90 o| ≲ 20 o (when both columns are seen through FF at all the phases) or |Θobs − 0o| ≲ 20 o or |Θobs − 180 o| ≲ 20 o

(when only one column is visible). 10 (a) (b) (c) Figure 13: Comparison of the sky maps with di ff erent e ff ects taken into account. (a) Emission of the accretion columns eclipsed by the columns and add star. (b) Attenuation by the free-falling magnetospheric flow is taken into account. (c) Scattering by the free-falling magnetospheric flow is added to the model. Parameters                       

> χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, ϕ0=0◦. The colour bar is universal for all the panels and shows isotropic luminosity normalized by the column power Lx.
> Figure 14: E ff ects of attenuation by funnel flow (FF) and reflection from FF on pulse fractions. The solid blue line shows the model with all e ff ects included, the green dotted (almost coinciding with the previous one) shows the model without NS eclipses, the dashed orange line is for the model without reflection from FF, and the dot-dashed red line ignores all the e ff ects of the FF. The latter corresponds to the configuration consisting of only accretion columns, yielding lower PF. Model parameters are χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, and ϕ0=0◦.

Thus, for a = 1, there could be a situation when PF is so low that the pulsations are missed. This cannot happen for a < 1, as the observed pulse fractions always exceed ∼ 0.2 (see Fig. 19). Naturally, for χ = 0o and a = 1, pulses are never observed. 

3.6. Impact of ϕ0

The parameter ϕ0 is a key parameter responsible for the ge-ometry and, consequently, for the observational properties of the object. Figure 20 shows the evolution of the pulse profile as a function of ϕ0, evaluated for two di ff erent values of a and 

Θobs .In general, at least for small χ as in our simulations, the pulse profile experiences a negative phase shift ∆Φ ∼ − ϕ0/(2 π) with an increase in ϕ0. To illustrate this and how the pulse shapes change with ϕ0, in Figs. 21 and 22 we plot the pulse pro-files phase-shifted to compensate for the rotation of the beam            

> Figure 15: Di ff erence of the sky maps with and without eclipses by the NS. Parameters χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, a=0.7, ϕ0=0◦.

pattern. The two figures di ff er in the observation angle Θobs .For observers at inclinations about Θobs = 60 ◦ (Fig. 22), the shape of the pulse acquires additional features, such as addi-tional maxima. Such secondary maxima are observed in real objects and will be discussed in §4.3. Both the phase-averaged luminosity ⟨Liso ⟩ and the pulse shape are a ff ected by ϕ0. PF is influenced as well. In Fig. 23, we show how PF varies with Liso as ϕ0 changes. In general, the lower the value of ϕ0 for 0 < ϕ 0 < 180 o, the lower the value of PF and the higher the value of ⟨Liso ⟩.

3.7. Impact of ˙m

The influence of the mass accretion rate ˙m is generally straightforward: luminosity Liso increases with ˙m due to in-creasing column size ( ξs) and temperature. Moreover, the optical depth τ in the FF increases as well. This results in more attenuation of radiation at certain phases. In particular, for configurations with a = 1 and large inclina-tions Θobs , complete attenuation of the column radiation occurs 11 Θobs = 20 ◦, χ = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, ϕ0 = 0◦ Θobs = 20 ◦, χ = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, ϕ0 = 40 ◦                                          

> Θobs =40 ◦,χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, ϕ0=0◦Θobs =40 ◦,χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, ϕ0=40 ◦
> Θobs =60 ◦,χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, ϕ0=0◦Θobs =60 ◦,χ=20 ◦, ˙ m=60, ϕ0=40 ◦

Figure 16: Dependence of luminosity Liso on phase Φ and parameter a. For low inclinations of the observer and thin accretion funnels (small a), the attenuation aff ects only a narrow range of phases. For higher a, accretion columns are lower, and the attenuation e ff ect makes pulsations more prominent. 

at some phases for higher ˙ m. As a result, in Fig. 23, PF in-creases from 0.4 to 1 while the mass accretion rate increases from ˙ m = 30 to 100. Figure 24 illustrates the anticorrelation between PF and 

⟨Liso ⟩. This behaviour arises from the dependence of the col-umn height on ˙ m. As the accretion rate increases, the column grows and bends along the dipole field, exposing additional ra-diating surfaces at all phases, which reduces the PF. Observa-tional evidence for such anticorrelation in real objects is dis-cussed further in §4.3. 

3.8. Impact of Θobs 

Figure 25 illustrates the gradual decrease in ⟨Liso ⟩ with the inclination of the observer. Face-on observers on average see a brighter and less-variable source. Figure 26, showing the dis-tributions for PF for di ff erent Θobs , demonstrates that smaller viewing angles Θobs lead to smaller PF for cos Θobs ≳ 0.3(Θobs ≲ 70 o). Furthermore, a face-on observer detects lower values of the asymmetry metric (see Fig. 9). At higher Θobs , the attenuation by FF plays an important role and drives PF to consistently high values. However, this trend is not universal. For instance, in configurations with a = 1, the ac-12 Figure 17: Distributions in phase-averaged ⟨Liso ⟩ for di ff erent a. All the nota-tion is the same as in Fig. 9. Models with Θobs = 0 are excluded. 

Figure 18: Sky map for the full-azimuthal accretion flow with parameters χ =

20 ◦, ˙m = 100, a = 1, ϕ0 = 0◦. Contours indicate the angular distance θ

(in degrees) to the nearest of the two magnetic poles. It can be seen that the observed flux depends only on θ.

Figure 19: Distributions in PF for di ff erent a. All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9. Models with Θobs = 0 are excluded. 

cretion columns can remain permanently screened by the opti-

θobs = 20 ◦, μang = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.2

θobs = 60 ◦, μang = 20 ◦, ˙ m = 60, a = 0.7Figure 20: Dependence of luminosity on the value of the midline azimuth ϕ0

and phase Φ. It can be seen that the change in the value of ϕ0 is not equal to the phase shift. The pulse shapes for di ff erent ϕ0 di ff er significantly. The sharp edges (steps) in the figure are the rendering artifacts due to the limited grid resolution. 

cally thick FF layer throughout the whole period. In such cases, the di ff erence between the minimum and maximum fluxes is strongly suppressed, and PF approaches zero. A distinct regime occurs at Θobs = 90 o, i.e., for an observer located exactly in the equatorial plane. Owing to the central symmetry of the system, all obscuration and visibility e ff ects originating from one hemisphere are precisely balanced by the opposite e ff ect in the opposite hemisphere. In practice, this means that the northern and southern accretion columns be-come indistinguishable, and the observed pulse profile exhibits a repeated pattern, which e ff ectively reduces the detected pe-riod by a factor of two. Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that the visibility of the system and PF at high angles Θobs are to be changed if one includes the disc surface in the problem. 13 Figure 21: Pulse profiles for di ff erent midline azimuths ϕ0. Values of ϕ0 vary from 0 ◦ to 180 ◦, from the top curve to the bottom one, and azimuthal filling a is 0.2, 0.5, and 0.7, from left to right. Each pulse is also moved horizontally by the phase value equal to −ϕ0/2π, so that the maxima do not move. Other parameters are fixed: ˙ m = 60, χ = 20 ◦, and Θobs = 20 ◦.

Figure 22: Pulse profiles for di ff erent midline azimuths ϕ0. Values of ϕ0 vary from 0 ◦ to 180 ◦, from the top curve to the bottom one, and azimuthal filling a is 0.2, 0.5, and 0.7, from left to right. Each pulse is also moved horizontally by the phase value equal to −ϕ0/2π, so that the maxima do not move. Other parameters are fixed: ˙ m = 60, χ = 20 ◦, and Θobs = 60 ◦.                 

> Θobs =20 ◦,χ=20 ◦Θobs =40 ◦,χ=20 ◦Θobs =60 ◦,χ=20 ◦

Figure 23: Variations of PF and Liso with ϕ0. Panels di ff er by observation angles Θobs = 20 o, 40 o, 60 o. Each of the four symbols corresponds to a unique ( a, ˙m)combination (see legend at first panel) and represents a sequence of points at di ff erent ϕ0 encoded by colour. The single open asterisk and cross in each panel shows the location corresponding to a = 1 and ˙ m = 30 and 100, respectively. 

4. Discussion 

4.1. Regimes of accretion and applicability of the model 

Depending on the mass accretion rate on a strongly mag-netized NS, the geometry of the radiating regions can change profoundly. At low accretion rates, when the falling plasma is braked in the NS atmosphere, the emission sites can be considered as 2D structures confined to the surface of the star. A radiation-supported shock wave forms when ˙M ≳

cA ⊥/κδ (BS76). As the mass accretion rate increases, the radiative shock shifts upwards. Then the total luminosity of the column is ap-proximately L∗∗ ∼ 10 39 erg s −1, which is the so-called limiting luminosity introduced by BS76. We limit accretion rates by ˙m = 100, when some of the models, with a ≲ 0.2, reach the disc radius. In this tall-column regime, the radiation of the column is relatively easy to calculate, as some of the e ff ects (emission from the shock and relativistic light bending) become relatively unimportant. Our models provide isotropic luminosities in the range Liso ∼ 10 38 − 10 39 erg s −1, see Fig.17. 

4.2. Light bending 

When the column is not very high, light bending e ff ects are significant. For a tall accretion column, the impact of the light bending may be estimated in Beloborodov’s approxima-14 Figure 24: Dependence of PF on phase-averaged isotropic luminosity for two inclinations of observer and magnetic inclination χ = 20 ◦. The middle azimuth of the column is ϕ0 = 0o. Dashed lines show results for Θobs = 20 o and solid, for 40 o. Symbols encode azimuthal filling factor a. Colours of the symbol encode di ff erent ˙ m, shown in the colour bar.    

> Figure 25: Distributions in ⟨Liso ⟩for di ff erent Θobs . All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9.

tion (Beloborodov, 2002), in which the deflection angle 

δb ≃ u

sin α(1 − cos α) , (24) where α is the angle between the radius vector and the tangent to the photon trajectory, and u = GM ⋆/(Rc 2). Strong light bending also a ff ects the visibility conditions of the source, es-pecially near the surface of the NS (see, for example, Falkner 2018). Corrections to the solid angles and thus to the fluxes are of the order of maximal u along the trajectory. Thus, for tall columns of height ξs, flux variations due to light bending are ∼ 0.2/ξ s, excluding the cases when considerable part of the light rays are grazing, as in the case of extreme lensing combined with an eclipse by the NS shown in Falkner (2018, figure 4.4). If the normalized transverse size of the column  

> Figure 26: Distributions in PF for di ff erent Θobs . All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9.

ξs sin θs ≫ 1, both the e ff ects of NS occultations and light bend-ing become negligible. Here, θs is the polar coordinate of the shock wave. For dipolar geometry, sin θs = pξs/ξ e, that allows to write the condition for occultation ine ffi ciency as 

ξs ≳ ξ1/3e . (25) Thus, when the column is high enough, due to high accretion rate and /or small A⊥, this relation is fulfilled, and the light bend-ing e ff ects may be ignored. For ξe = 100, the requirement for the column height is ξs ≳ 3 (see Fig. 4). All the models in our grid satisfy this condition. For a more general case, taking into account light bending is crucial, and we are planning to include it in the subsequent versions of the code. 

4.3. Observed pulse profile variations at high accretion rate 

There are several cases when XRPs were thoroughly studied in the luminosity range covered by our model. In particular, Hou et al. (2022) made timing and spectral analyses of an out-burst of the Ultraluminous X-ray Pulsar (ULXP) RX J0209.6-7427 in the Small Magellanic Cloud that reached luminos-ity of ∼ 10 39 erg s −1. During the flare, PF behaved non-monotonically, and the pulse shape evolved considerably with the bolometric luminosity. The PF decreased up to isotropic luminosity of ∼ 2 ×

10 38 erg s −1, then rose, and then decreased again, after ∼ 6 ×

10 38 erg s −1. The anticorrelation between L and PF at the high-est luminosities (see figure 7 of Hou et al., 2022) can be ex-plained in our modelas a consequence of the column height de-pendence on the accretion rate. When the column is not too high, much of its radiation is attenuated by FF for a non-polar observer. As we mentioned in Sect. 3.4, the attenuation by the FF drives the PF to high values (see also Fig. 14). As the accre-tion rate increases, the column grows in height and bends along the dipole field lines. Thus, the observer starts seeing larger and larger fractions of unattenuated column surfaces at all the phases, which decreases the PF and additionally increases the luminosity. This behaviour is reproduced in a range of models, see Fig. 24. 15 Another observed feature was the relative dimming of the second pulse maximum with increasing bolometric luminosity (see figure 5 of Hou et al. 2022). This phenomenon can be ex-plained in our model, when the specific geometry is assumed. In Fig. 27, we examine the variation of the normalized pulse profile ˜ Liso = Liso / max  

> Φ

Liso with shock height for the parame-ters Θobs = 60 ◦, χ = 20 ◦, a = 0.2 and ϕ0 = 80 ◦ . The ampli-tude ratio between the primary (at Φ = 0.25) and secondary (at 

Φ = 0.7) maxima depends on the column height. In terms of Fig. 1, the primary maximum of the pulse is pro-duced by the visibility conditions of the two surfaces (north-ern polar and southern equatorial, yellow and green in the left panel) which are on average more favourably oriented with re-spect to the observer. They are responsible for the maximum at 

Φ ≃ 0.25. The visibility of the other two surfaces is a ff ected by the absorption in FF. For certain values of ϕ0, attenuation by FF is present only when the columns are tall enough and specifically damps the secondary maximum of the pulse. At even higher accretion rates, when the Eddington limit is exceeded in the disc, optically thick outflows may be launched from outside the magnetosphere. Their presence restricts the visibility of the source. If the source remains visible, radiation scattered by the wind likely decreases the PF (e.g., Mushtukov and Portegies Zwart, 2023).          

> Figure 27: Pulse profile evolution with increasing ˙ m. The secondary maximum becomes fainter relative to the primary one while the shock wave raises Θobs =
> 60 o, χ =20 o,a=0.2, ϕ 0=80 o,

4.4. Phase shift of the maxima and twist of the magnetosphere 

Some of the phase-resolved observations of the well-studied XRP flares (Wilson-Hodge et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2020; Doroshenko et al., 2020) show shifts of the pulse maximum phase by 0.5. This shift is a result of gradual changes in the pulse profile and of the relative contributions of the two max-ima. In our model, secondary maxima exist and their relative am-plitude depends on ˙ m, but they never become stronger than the primary. Hence, a phase shift by 0.5 is not possible. This can be explained by the fact that in our present modelling, the mag-netic angle is limited to small values being either 10 ◦ or 20 ◦.For large magnetic angles, we expect that the footprint of the accretion column would have a large spread along the magnetic latitudes. This situation would require a change in the model setup, as described in Appendix C. On the other hand, the position of the pulse maximum is also aff ected by other parameters, such as the azimuthal filling factor 

a and the midline shift parameter ϕ0, which might vary with the mass accretion rate for di ff erent reasons. Such an explanation was proposed by Miller (1996) to explain the phase lags ob-served for bursting pulsar GRO J1744 −28 during the outbursts when the object is expected to develop a radiation-supported shock. In MHD simulations of accreting magnetized stars, Kulkarni and Romanova (2013) observed an azimuthal shift of the hot spot on the NS surface relative to the azimuth where the ac-cretion flow originates at the disc’s inner radius. The shift is an expected outcome of the twist of the magnetosphere (Miller, 1996) which occurs because of the angular velocity di ff erence between the star and the disc. Kulkarni and Romanova (2013) have found that the twist of the magnetosphere depends on the fastness parameter, defined as (Elsner and Lamb, 1977) 

ω = (Rm/Rco )3/2 , (26) where Rco = (GM ⋆Ω−2 

> ⋆

)1/3 is the corotation radius, which is defined as the radius where the angular velocities of the disc and the magnetosphere, Ω⋆, are equal. As Rm depends on ˙ m

(see Eq. (2)), changing the latter leads to variations of ω. This makes it possible to relate the twist of the magnetosphere to changes in the rotation rate, particularly during strong bursts, when the fastness parameter can reach small values. We expect such a twist to be present in XRP magnetospheres. Even more importantly, we expect this twist to change with the mass accretion rate, as the fastness parameter of the source changes. If the twist occurs mostly in the outer magnetosphere, it e ff ectively leads to non-zero ϕ0 in our model. As the twist of the magnetosphere depends on the accretion rate, we expect that this could produce subtle but observable eff ects of the timing properties (see Appendix D). 

4.5. Di ff use scattering in the magnetosphere diminish pulse fraction 

In our model we adopt the approximation that all the photons that do not manage to pass directly through FFs are reflected back. Furthermore, we ignore emission from the FF plasma. Below we show that the second assumption is justified, while neglecting the radiation di ff using through the flow may lead to PF being overestimated by as much as ∼ 30% for low inclina-tions. Simple estimates show that the magnetospheric plasma may be considered completely ionised and purely scattering. In a more general case, some fraction of the incident flux is re-flected, a small fraction, ∼ exp( −τ), passes directly without a single scattering, and other photons are able to cross the FF 16 after one or several scatterings. To estimate the di ff use flux ra-diated from the outer surface of the FF, we will use the analytic result for the plane scattering slab with τ ≫ 1, illuminated by the parallel rays at some angle α1 to the normal (see Sobolev, 1963, chapter X, §1). The unscattered attenuated component in such a setup may be easily neglected. The flux at depth τ is diminished relative to the incident flux by the following factor 4

fd = (2 + 3 cos α1)4 + 3τ cos α1 , (27) where α1 is the angle between the incident radiation and the normal to the surface. The optical thickness to scattering in the FF lies in the interval 1 − 30 for our input parameters (see Fig. 28). For all trajectories for all models in our sample, we have calculated the values of the factor fd given by Eq. (27). Resulting distributions for factors fd for our sample of models are shown in Fig. 29. Consequently, account for the di ff use flux can decrease PF by a factor of (1 + fd), that is, by ∼ 20% for ∼ 75% of the models for Θobs < 60 ◦. We note that the di ff use flux is more important for lower accretion columns when PF values are big-ger (see Fig. 24). For lower accretion rates and smaller τ, the applicability of our model is also limited by the accretion shock emission, ignored in this study. The plasma in the FF is highly ionized. Its ionization param-eter can be estimated as follows: 

ξion ≡ fd LnHR2 ≃ fd G ˙MM ⋆

R⋆

1

R2

mH

ρ , (28) where density ρ = ˙M/(A⊥vff ), and vff = √2GM /R. The cross-section of the flow may be estimated, using Eqs (8) and (5), as 

A⊥ ≈ 4πa R 3∆Re/R2e . Thus, 

ξion ∼ 10 6 ∆Re

0.25 Re

fd

0.2

a

0.25 

√ξξe

erg cm s −1 . (29) The FF plasma is cooled by the bremsstrahlung and inverse Compton scattering and is heated by the direct Compton scat-tering in the magnetospheric flow. Taking into account dimin-ishing factor fd, we approximate the heating rate [erg s −1] by the Compton scattering (c.f. eq. 2.5 in Begelman et al., 1983), an average electron on the dark side of the column gains energy at a rate 

Γ = kT IC 

mec2

σT fd Lx

πR2 , (30) where the equilibrium inverse Compton temperature kT IC =R hνFνdν    

> 4RFνdν

. Characteristic time of heating to the equilibrium tem-perature tIC ∼ kT IC /Γ is much less than the characteristic free-fall time: 

vff tIC 

R ≃ mec2π √GM ⋆R

σT fd Lx

∼ 0.03 

r R

10 8 cm 0.2

fd

10 38 erg s −1

Lx

.

(31) Consequently, the plasma temperature plasma in FF is about 

TIC , whose value depends on the spectrum and is expected to be less than few keV.                       

> 4With accuracy of better than 4%, Eq. (27) is close to equation (15) of Flexer and Mushtukov (2024) in the case of cos α1=1.
> Figure 28: Optical thickness to scattering of the magnetospheric flow just above the shock, at R=1.1Rs(solid lines), and near the disc, R=0.9Re(dashed lines). Line thickness encodes the azimuthal parameter, from a=0.25 for the thinnest line to a=1 for the thickest.
> Figure 29: Distributions in the di ff usion factor fdfor di ff erent Θobs . All the notation is the same as in Fig. 9.

5. Summary 

We have calculated the beam patterns produced by a pair of tall optically-thick accretion columns in an XRP with a dipolar magnetic field. The bolometric luminosity of the columns in the considered regime lies in the range 10 38 − 10 39 erg s −1. In this case, the expected beam patterns are profoundly di ff erent from those produced by hot spots on the NS surface at low accretion rates, as well as from the conventional fan and pencil diagrams symmetric with respect to the magnetic axis. A key finding is that even within a dipole magnetic field con-figuration, taking into account the 3D geometry of the columns makes the pulse profiles complex and diverse. In particular, we demonstrate that the asymmetric pulse profiles, frequently ob-17 served in XRPs, can be produced without any loss of central symmetry in the radiating sites. Pulsations in our setup are pro-duced even for magnetic angle χ = 0. Two particularly relevant parameters responsible for the diversity of pulse profiles are the columns’ height and their central azimuth position ϕ0. The lat-ter controls the column rotation with respect to the (inclined) magnetic axis of the star. Non-trivial values of ϕ0 (di ff erent from 0 o and 180 o) produce asymmetric pulse profiles. To describe the shapes of the pulse profiles, we introduce a quantitative metric A for pulse profile asymmetry that can be readily applied to observational data (see §3.3). If either a = 1or χ = 0, the pulse is always symmetrical ( A = 0). In most of our simulations, the calculated asymmetries lie in the range 

∼ 0.05 − 0.25. We show that for the same inclination Θobs , magnetic angle χ,azimuthal fraction a, and column height, di ff erent pulse profiles may be generated by varying the central azimuth of the column 

ϕ0 (§3.6). The physical motivation for introducing ϕ0 , 0 is the expectation that real XRP magnetospheres are twisted (Miller, 1996), which is confirmed by the MHD simulations of Kulkarni and Romanova (2013). This parameter can be considered as an approximation to a rather complex physical situation, where the magnetosphere is deformed by the rotation rate mismatch between the NS and the accretion disc. This di ff erence, and thus the central azimuth ϕ0, is expected to depend on the mass accretion rate which a ff ects the size of the magnetosphere. An important factor in the formation of the pulse shapes at large mass accretion rates is the absorption by the funnel flow (FF) above the accretion column. It is included in our model as a source of attenuation and scattering. The presence of the FF on the line of sight decreases considerably the visible isotropic luminosity of the columns at certain spin phases, thus increas-ing the pulse fraction (PF). Radiation reflected by the inner, illu-minated side of the FF compensates to some degree the strong flux variations caused by the attenuation. In future work, we are planning to include the contribution of the radiation di ff us-ing through the FF and emitted by its dark side, which might reach as high as 30% for the considered parameter range. We have investigated the distributions in PF for di ff erent in-clinations Θobs . For Θobs ≤ 20 ◦, half of the models yield PF ∼ 0.3 − 0.5 (see Fig. 26). At higher Θobs , PF can be as high as 0 .8 − 0.9, but strongly inclined sources are unlikely to be observed due to attenuation by the disc and disc outflows. For magnetospheric flows with full azimuthal filling a = 1, the values of PF are generally lower than for the rest of the models (see Fig. 19). Increase in mass accretion rate onto a NS increases the col-umn height and thereby a ff ects the observed pulse profiles. Two observational e ff ects can be attributed to this. First, for lumi-nous XRPs, there is observational evidence for anti-correlation between PF and luminosity in the relevant luminosity range (Fürst et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2022). Within our model we find a physical explanation for this anti-correlation: increase in ˙M elevates the column, which makes a larger part of it visible to the observer throughout the whole spin period. Such a change in visibility conditions increases the minimal flux observed dur-ing the spin period, and thus decreases the PF. Another observational e ff ect potentially explained by our model is the peculiar pulse shape evolution observed by Hou et al. (2022) during a bright flare of RX J0209.6-7427. As the source reached its peak luminosity of ≳ 10 39 erg s −1, its pulse shape gradually lost a secondary peak and evolved to-wards a nearly sinusoidal one. We found similar behaviour in our simulations with a ∼ 0.2 and ϕ0 ≃ 80 o for the inclination of 

Θobs ∼ 60 o.

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge the collaboration with Galina Lipunova at the early stage of the work. The ray tracing technique, as well as the part of the model handling calculations of processes in the free-falling flow above the shock (FF), were developed by BM with support from the Russian Science Foundation grant 25-12-00012. PA, whose contribution is the fundamental design of the geometrical model and supervision of the work done by BM, was supported by Simons Foundation grant 00001470 and the International Space Science Institute (ISSI) in Bern, through ISSI International Team project #495 (Feeding the spinning top). We thank Sergey Tsygankov for providing the Cen X-3 pulse profile data. 18 Appendix A. Derivation of viewing angle and area of a sur-face element of the magnetic tube 

Unit vectors in the spherical coordinate system ( R, θ, ϕ ), an-chored with the magnetic dipole vector μμμ, are: 

eeer =



sin θ cos ϕ

sin θ sin ϕ

cos θ

 , eeeθ =



cos θ cos ϕ

cos θ sin ϕ

− sin θ

 , eeeϕ =



− sin ϕ

cos ϕ

0

 . (A.1) The flow geometry in dipole approximation is given by the formula: 

R = Re sin 2 θ, (A.2) where Re is the radius of a specific magnetic line in the magnetic-equator plane. The unit vector eeel along the field line is 

eeel = 2 cos θ eeer + sin θ eeeθ

√3 cos 2 θ + 1 . (A.3) The unit vector eeen that is perpendicular to the field line is 

eeen = [eeel × eeeϕ] = −2 cos θ eeeθ + sin θ eeer

√3 cos 2 θ + 1 (A.4) or 

eeen = 1

√3 cos 2 θ + 1



(1 − 3 cos 2 θ) cos ϕ

(1 − 3 cos 2 θ) sin ϕ

3 sin θ cos θ

 . (A.5) The unit vector of the direction to an observer is 

eeeobs =



sin θobs cos ϕobs 

sin θobs sin ϕobs 

cos θobs 

 . (A.6) To obtain cos ψ, we calculate the scalar product of eeeobs and 

eeen:cos ψ = (eeeobs · eeen) = 1

√3 cos 2 θ + 1

h(1 − 3 cos 2 θ) cos ϕ eeeobs ,x

+ (1 − 3 cos 2 θ) sin ϕ eeeobs ,y + 3 sin θ cos θ eeeobs ,z

i,

(A.7) Thus, cos ψ = 1

√3 cos 2 θ + 1

h(1 − 3 cos 2 θ) sin θobs cos ( ϕ − ϕobs )

+ 3 sin θ cos θ cos θobs 

i.

(A.8) Let us also obtain the area of elementary surface d S . First we find the distance element d l along the field line. From (A.3) one has: dR

dl = 2 cos θ

√3 cos 2 θ + 1 (A.9) or dl = Re

√3 cos 2 θ + 1 sin θ dθ . (A.10) The distance element along the azimuth (perpendicular to the field line) is dlϕ = R sin θdϕ = Re sin 3 θdϕ. (A.11) Thus, the area of a surface element is dS = dl dlϕ = ˜S (θ) d θdϕ, (A.12) where ˜S (θ) = R2e

√3 cos 2 θ + 1 sin 4 θ. (A.13) 

Appendix B. Ray tracing 

Using the ray-tracing method, we check whether each sur-face element of the column is visible to an observer. For each surface element we define a ray towards the ob-server. The ray does not reach the observer if it meets on its way the NS surface or one of the surfaces of accretion columns, that is, an eclipse occurs. It is possible to find the eclipses analyti-cally since, in our model, the surfaces of the NS and magnetic tubes are described by explicit equations (a sphere and a dipole surface). Steps required to implement the ray tracing method: 1. Set the equation of the ray: specify the origin, i.e., the elemental surface area on the column surface and direction of propagation (direction to observer). 2. Set the equations of the surfaces that describe the shape of objects that potentially obscures the source 3. Find roots at which the ray equation and the surface equa-tion are equal. A real positive root implies intersection, i.d., eclipse. A negative real root root means that the inter-section point is behind the source. 1) Let us define the origin of a ray as vector R0R0R0 and the unit vector from the ray origin to the observer as DDD. The latter is equivalent to (A.6) for an infinite observer. Then any point P of the ray at distance t from its origin, t ≥ 0, satisfies 

PPP(t) ≡ R0R0R0 + t D DD . (B.1) We convert it to the coordinate system where the azimuthal an-gle of the observer ϕobs = 0o:

PPP = R0



sin θ0 cos ϕ0

sin θ0 sin ϕ0

cos θ0

 + t



sin θobs 

0cos θobs 

 . (B.2) Here R0 = Re sin 2 θ0.2) If the eclipsing object is the magnetic tube, then 

R = Re sin 2 θ. (B.3) Let’s multiply both parts by R2:

R3 = Re R2 sin 2 θ. (B.4) 3) Intersection condition is 

PPP = RRR , (B.5) where RRR is the vector to a point on the surface of an eclipsing object. Using the latter to express 

R3 ≡ (R2 

> x

+ R2 

> y

+ R2 

> z

)3/2 = (P2 

> x

+ P2 

> y

+ P2 

> z

)3/2 ,

R2 sin 2 θ ≡ R2 

> x

+ R2 

> y

= P2 

> x

+ P2 

> y

, (B.6) 19 we rewrite (B.4): (R20 + t2 + 2R0t (sin θ0 cos ϕ0 sin θobs + cos θ0 cos θobs )) 3/2 == Re(R20 sin 2 θ0 + t2 sin 2 θobs + 2R0t sin θ0 cos ϕ0 sin θobs ).

(B.7) Using substitutions 

t = R0 x ,

cos α = (sin θ0 cos ϕ0 sin θobs + cos θ0 cos θobs ) , (B.8) one obtains from (R20 + R20 x2 + 2R20 x cos α)3 = R2e (R20 sin 2 θ0++R20 x2 sin θobs + 2R20 x sin θ0 cos ϕ0 sin θobs )2 , (B.9) Lastly, taking into account R0 = Re sin 2 θ0, we obtain: (1 + x2 + 2x cos α)3 = (1 + x2η2 + 2x cos ϕ0 η)2 . (B.10) Here η ≡ sin θobs / sin θ0.We open the brackets and move all the terms to the left side: 

x6 + 6 cos α x5 + (12 cos 2 α + 3 − η4)x4++(8 cos 3 α + 12 cos α − 4η3 cos ϕ0)x3++(12 cos 2 α + 3 − 4 cos 2 ϕ0 η2 − 2η2)x2++(6 cos α − 4 cos ϕ0 η)x = 0.

(B.11) After numerically computing the roots of (B.11), we find the vector of intersection point using (B.2). We note that Eq. (B.11) describes the intersection with an entire dipole surface for spe-cific Re. However, because the accretion columns occupy only a limited range of azimuths (determined by parameters a and ϕ0), we must further verify that any found intersection point actually lies within the physical domain of the column. This is done by transforming the intersection coordinates into spherical angles 

θ and ϕ, and checking that a column is present at those angular coordinates. In a similar manner, we search for intersections with the NS surface. The intersection condition (B.5) is written as 

|R0R0R0 + t D DD|2 = R2 

> ⋆

(B.12) or 

D2t2 + 2 R0R0R0 · DDD t + (R20 − R2

> ⋆

) = 0. (B.13) which is a simple quadratic equation with respect to t.

Appendix C. Constraint on the possible maximum az-imuthal filling a

Within our geometry, as the magnetic axis tilts, the parameter 

a ceases to be free and begins to be constrained. The condition imposed on magnetospheric lines is that the cylyndric coordi-nate of the dipole line for given ϕ and θ lies in the disc plane in the range from Rd to (1 + ∆ )Rd, with the fiducial ∆ = 0.25. When a dipole line does not satisfy this condition, then matter does not travel along the line. We have obtained an analytical formula for the allowed angles ϕ:cos 2 ϕ ≥ 1tan 2 χ

1 − (1 + ∆ ) sin 2 θd

(1 + ∆ ) sin 2 θd

, (C.1) where θd = min( π/2 − arctan(tan χ cos ϕ)). For ϕ0 = 0 (or 

θd = π/2 − χ) this simplifies to cos 2 ϕ ≥ 1(1 + ∆ ) sin 2 χ − 1tan 2 χ . (C.2) Allowed angles ϕ are directly transformed into allowable max-imum value of the azimuthal covering factor a. It is illustrated by Fig. C.30.   

> Figure C.30: Maximum possible value of afor the model presuming a fixed magnetic latitude for the accretion funnel at the NS surface.

As can be seen from the Fig. C.30, at small values of χ the parameter a ≤ 1 remains free. But at some magnetic angle χ

(which depends on the value of ∆) there is a leap (dashed lines) in the value of the allowed range of values of the parameter a,and a ceases to be a free parameter. While the range of values decreases with the increasing inclination magnetic angle, the maximum a → arccos([1 + ∆ ]−1/2)/π at large values of χ.

Appendix D. The influence of the ˙ m-dependent variation of 

ϕ0 on timing properties 

During an outburst, apart from the redistribution of relative amplitudes between the pulse maxima, which can lead to an abrupt shift of the phase of the maximum, our model predicts phase shifts related to changes in column orientation deter-mined by ϕ0. If observed continuously for time ∆t, an XRP with the evolving-azimuth column (varying ϕ0) would experience a period change ∆P, estimated as a correction to the measured spin period with respect to the real one 

Pobserved = P 1 + P

2π

dϕ0

dt 

!

, (D.1) or 

∆P ∼ P2

2π

dϕ0

dt . (D.2) If the column azimuth changed by ∆ϕ0 ∼ π in ∆t ∼ 10 days due to considerable variation of ˙ m, the additional ‘spin-up ef-fect’ would be ∆P/P ∼ 10 −6, which is a subtle e ff ect likely to 20 be overridden by the changes in the intrinsic spin period. Vari-able ϕ0 contributes to the observed timing properties of XRPs mainly through the term that depends on d ˙ m/dt rather than ˙ m.It is most likely to become important during rapid changes in mass accretion rate, including the rising branches of flares and the putative transitions between the propeller and the accretor regimes (see for instance Tsygankov et al. 2016). 

References 

Abolmasov, P., Lipunova, G., 2023. Simulating the shock dynamics of a neutron star accretion column. MN-RAS 524, 4148–4167. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1951 ,

arXiv:2207.12312 .Alonso-Hernández, J., Fürst, F., Kretschmar, P., Caballero, I., Joyce, A.M., 2022. Common patterns in pulse profiles of high-mass X-ray binaries. A&A 662, A62. doi: 10.1051/ 0004-6361/202141774 , arXiv:2201.09580 .Bachetti, M., Romanova, M.M., Kulkarni, A., Burderi, L., di Salvo, T., 2010. QPO emission from moving hot spots on the surface of neutron stars: a model. MNRAS 403, 1193–1205. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16203.x ,

arXiv:0911.4493 .Basko, M.M., Sunyaev, R.A., 1976. The limiting luminosity of accreting neutron stars with magnetic fields. MNRAS 175, 395–417. doi: 10.1093/mnras/175.2.395 .Begelman, M.C., McKee, C.F., Shields, G.A., 1983. Compton heated winds and coronae above accretion disks. I Dynamics. ApJ 271, 70–88. doi: 10.1086/161178 .Beloborodov, A.M., 2002. Gravitational Bending of Light Near Compact Objects. ApJL 566, L85–L88. doi: 10.1086/ 339511 , arXiv:astro-ph/0201117 .Braje, T.M., Romani, R.W., Rauch, K.P., 2000. Light Curves of Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars. ApJ 531, 447–452. doi: 10. 1086/308448 , arXiv:astro-ph/0004411 .Das, P., Porth, O., 2024. Three-dimensional GRMHD Simula-tions of Neutron Star Jets. ApJL 960, L12. doi: 10.3847/ 2041-8213/ad151f , arXiv:2311.05301 .Doroshenko, V., Zhang, S.N., Santangelo, A., Ji, L., Tsy-gankov, S., Mushtukov, A., Qu, L.J., Zhang, S., Ge, M.Y., Chen, Y.P., Bu, Q.C., Cao, X.L., Chang, Z., Chen, G., Chen, L., Chen, T.X., Chen, Y., Chen, Y.B., Cui, W., Cui, W.W., Deng, J.K., Dong, Y.W., Du, Y.Y., Fu, M.X., Gao, G.H., Gao, H., Gao, M., Gu, Y.D., Guan, J., Guo, C.C., Han, D.W., Hu, W., Huang, Y., Huo, J., Jia, S.M., Jiang, L.H., Jiang, W.C., Jin, J., Jin, Y.J., Kong, L.D., Li, B., Li, C.K., Li, G., Li, M.S., Li, T.P., Li, W., Li, X., Li, X.B., Li, X.F., Li, Y.G., Li, Z.J., Li, Z.W., Liang, X.H., Liao, J.Y., Liu, C.Z., Liu, G.Q., Liu, H.W., Liu, S.Z., Liu, X.J., Liu, Y., Liu, Y.N., Lu, B., Lu, F.J., Lu, X.F., Luo, T., Ma, X., Meng, B., Nang, Y., Nie, J.Y., Ou, G., Sai, N., Shang, R.C., Song, L.M., Song, X.Y., Sun, L., Tan, Y., Tao, L., Tuo, Y.L., Wang, G.F., Wang, J., Wang, W.S., Wang, Y.S., Wen, X.Y., Wu, B.B., Wu, M., Xiao, G.C., Xiong, S.L., Xu, H., Xu, Y.P., Yang, Y.R., Yang, J.W., Yang, S., Yang, Y.J., Zhang, A.M., Zhang, C.L., Zhang, C.M., Zhang, F., Zhang, H.M., Zhang, J., Zhang, Q., Zhang, T., Zhang, W., Zhang, W.C., Zhang, W.Z., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y.F., Zhang, Y.J., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Z.L., Zhao, H.S., Zhao, J.L., Zhao, X.F., Zheng, S.J., Zhu, Y., Zhu, Y.X., Zou, C.L., Zhang, R.L., 2020. Hot disc of the Swift J0243.6 +6124 revealed by Insight-HXMT. MNRAS 491, 1857–1867. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2879 ,

arXiv:1909.12614 .Elsner, R.F., Lamb, F.K., 1977. Accretion by magnetic neu-tron stars. I. Magnetospheric structure and stability. ApJ 215, 897–913. doi: 10.1086/155427 .Falkner, S., 2018. Modeling of X-ray pulsars in curved space time. Ph.D. thesis. Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. Flexer, C., Mushtukov, A.A., 2024. Coupling of radiation and magnetospheric accretion flow in ULX pulsars: radiation pressure and photon escape time. MNRAS 529, 1571–1578. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae653 , arXiv:2403.07713 .Fuerst, F., Walton, D., Stern, D., Bachetti, M., Barret, D., Brightman, M., Harrison, F., Rana, V., 2017. Accretion geometry and variability of ULX pulsars, in: Ness, J.U., Migliari, S. (Eds.), The X-ray Universe 2017, p. 81. Fürst, F., Walton, D.J., Heida, M., Bachetti, M., Pinto, C., Middleton, M.J., Brightman, M., Earnshaw, H.P., Barret, D., Fabian, A.C., Kretschmar, P., Pottschmidt, K., Ptak, A., Roberts, T., Stern, D., Webb, N., Wilms, J., 2021. Long-term pulse period evolution of the ultra-luminous X-ray pulsar NGC 7793 P13. A&A 651, A75. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/ 202140625 .Giacconi, R., Gursky, H., Kellogg, E., Schreier, E., Tananbaum, H., 1971. Discovery of Periodic X-Ray Pulsations in Cen-taurus X-3 from UHURU. ApJL 167, L67. doi: 10.1086/ 180762 .Hou, X., Ge, M.Y., Ji, L., Zhang, S.N., You, Y., Tao, L., Zhang, S., Soria, R., Feng, H., Zhou, M., Tuo, Y.L., Song, L.M., Wang, J.C., 2022. Fan-beamed X-Ray Emission from 1 to above 130 keV from the Ultraluminous X-Ray Pulsar RX J0209.6-7427 in the Small Magellanic Cloud. ApJ 938, 149. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8c93 , arXiv:2208.14785 .Inoue, H., 1975. X-ray emission from a neutron star with a strong magnetic dipole field. PASJ 27, 311–323. Israel, G.L., Belfiore, A., Stella, L., Esposito, P., Casella, P., De Luca, A., Marelli, M., Papitto, A., Perri, M., Puccetti, S., Castillo, G.A.R., Salvetti, D., Tiengo, A., Zampieri, L., D’Agostino, D., Greiner, J., Haberl, F., Novara, G., Sal-vaterra, R., Turolla, R., Watson, M., Wilms, J., Wolter, 21 A., 2017a. An accreting pulsar with extreme proper-ties drives an ultraluminous x-ray source in NGC 5907. Science 355, 817–819. doi: 10.1126/science.aai8635 ,

arXiv:1609.07375 .Israel, G.L., Papitto, A., Esposito, P., Stella, L., Zampieri, L., Belfiore, A., Rodríguez Castillo, G.A., De Luca, A., Tiengo, A., Haberl, F., Greiner, J., Salvaterra, R., Sandrelli, S., Lisini, G., 2017b. Discovery of a 0.42-s pulsar in the ultralumi-nous X-ray source NGC 7793 P13. MNRAS 466, L48–L52. doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw218 , arXiv:1609.06538 .Ji, L., Ducci, L., Santangelo, A., Zhang, S., Suleimanov, V., Tsygankov, S., Doroshenko, V., Nabizadeh, A., Zhang, S.N., Ge, M.Y., Tao, L., Bu, Q.C., Qu, J.L., Lu, F.J., Chen, L., Song, L.M., Li, T.P., Xu, Y.P., Cao, X.L., Chen, Y., Liu, C.Z., Cai, C., Chang, Z., Chen, G., Chen, T.X., Chen, Y.B., Chen, Y.P., Cui, W., Cui, W.W., Deng, J.K., Dong, Y.W., Du, Y.Y., Fu, M.X., Gao, G.H., Gao, H., Gao, M., Gu, Y.D., Guan, J., Guo, C.C., Han, D.W., Huang, Y., Huo, J., Jia, S.M., Jiang, L.H., Jiang, W.C., Jin, J., Jin, Y.J., Kong, L.D., Li, B., Li, C.K., Li, G., Li, M.S., Li, W., Li, X., Li, X.B., Li, X.F., Li, Y.G., Li, Z.W., Liang, X.H., Liao, J.Y., Liu, B.S., Liu, G.Q., Liu, H.X., Liu, H.W., Liu, X.J., Liu, Y.N., Lu, B., Lu, X.F., Luo, Q., Luo, T., Ma, X., Meng, B., Nang, Y., Nie, J.Y., Ou, G., Sai, N., Shang, R.C., Song, X.Y., Sun, L., Tan, Y., Tuo, Y.L., Wang, C., Wang, G.F., Wang, J., Wang, P.J., Wang, W.S., Wang, Y.S., Wen, X.Y., Wu, B.Y., Wu, B.B., Wu, M., Xiao, G.C., Xiao, S., Xiong, S.L., Xu, H., Yang, J.W., Yang, S., Yang, Y.J., Yang, Y.J., Yi, Q.B., Yin, Q.Q., You, Y., Zhang, A.M., Zhang, C.M., Zhang, F., Zhang, H.M., Zhang, J., Zhang, P., Zhang, T., Zhang, W., Zhang, W.C., Zhang, W.Z., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y.F., Zhang, Y.J., Zhang, Y.H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Z.L., Zhao, H.S., Zhao, X.F., Zheng, S.J., Zhou, D.K., Zhou, J.F., Zhu, Y.X., Zhu, Y., Zhuang, R.L., 2020. Switches between accretion structures during flares in 4U 1901 +03. MNRAS 493, 5680– 5692. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa569 , arXiv:2002.08919 .Kraus, U., Blum, S., Schulte, J., Ruder, H., Meszaros, P., 1996. Analyzing X-Ray Pulsar Profiles: Geometry and Beam Pat-tern of Centaurus X-3. ApJ 467, 794. doi: 10.1086/177653 .Kulkarni, A.K., Romanova, M.M., 2013. Analytical hotspot shapes and magnetospheric radius from 3D simulations of magnetospheric accretion. MNRAS 433, 3048–3061. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt945 , arXiv:1303.4681 .Landau, L., Lifshitz, E., 1981. Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory. Course of theoretical physics, Butterworth-Heinemann. URL: https://books.google. co.il/books?id=SvdoN3k8EysC .Laycock, S.G.T., Cappallo, R.C., Pradhan, P., Christodoulou, D.M., Paul, B., 2025. Pulse-profile Modeling and Spin–Orbit Alignment in a Suzaku Sample of Accreting X-Ray Binary Pulsars. ApJ 978, 80. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9399 .Miller, G.S., 1996. The Accretion Curtain and Pulse Phase Variations of the Bursting X-Ray Pulsar GRO J1744-28. ApJL 468, L29. doi: 10.1086/310231 .Mushtukov, A., Tsygankov, S., 2022. Accreting strongly magnetised neutron stars: X-ray Pulsars. arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2204.14185doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204. 14185 , arXiv:2204.14185 .Mushtukov, A.A., Portegies Zwart, S., 2023. Bright X-ray pul-sars: how outflows influence beaming, pulsations and pulse phase lags. MNRAS 518, 5457–5464. doi: 10.1093/mnras/ stac3431 , arXiv:2211.08952 .Mushtukov, A.A., Suleimanov, V.F., Tsygankov, S.S., Ingram, A., 2017. Optically thick envelopes around ULXs pow-ered by accreating neutron stars. MNRAS 467, 1202–1208. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx141 , arXiv:1612.00964 .Poutanen, J., Tsygankov, S.S., Doroshenko, V., Forsblom, S.V., Jenke, P., Kaaret, P., Berdyugin, A.V., Blinov, D., Kravtsov, V., Liodakis, I., Tzouvanou, A., Di Marco, A., Heyl, J., La Monaca, F., Mushtukov, A.A., Pavlov, G.G., Salganik, A., Veledina, A., Weisskopf, M.C., Zane, S., Loktev, V., Suleimanov, V.F., Wilson-Hodge, C., Berdyugina, S.V., Kag-itani, M., Piirola, V., Sakanoi, T., Agudo, I., Antonelli, L.A., Bachetti, M., Baldini, L., Baumgartner, W.H., Bel-lazzini, R., Bianchi, S., Bongiorno, S.D., Bonino, R., Brez, A., Bucciantini, N., Capitanio, F., Castellano, S., Cavaz-zuti, E., Chen, C.T., Ciprini, S., Costa, E., De Rosa, A., Del Monte, E., Di Gesu, L., Di Lalla, N., Donnarumma, I., Dovˇ ciak, M., Ehlert, S.R., Enoto, T., Evangelista, Y., Fabi-ani, S., Ferrazzoli, R., Garcia, J.A., Gunji, S., Hayashida, K., Iwakiri, W., Jorstad, S.G., Karas, V., Kislat, F., Kitaguchi, T., Kolodziejczak, J.J., Latronico, L., Maldera, S., Manfreda, A., Marin, F., Marinucci, A., Marscher, A.P., Marshall, H.L., Massaro, F., Matt, G., Mitsuishi, I., Mizuno, T., Muleri, F., Negro, M., Ng, C.Y., O’Dell, S.L., Omodei, N., Oppedisano, C., Papitto, A., Peirson, A.L., Perri, M., Pesce-Rollins, M., Petrucci, P.O., Pilia, M., Possenti, A., Puccetti, S., Ramsey, B.D., Rankin, J., Ratheesh, A., Roberts, O.J., Romani, R.W., Sgrò, C., Slane, P., So ffi tta, P., Spandre, G., Swartz, D.A., Tamagawa, T., Tavecchio, F., Taverna, R., Tawara, Y., Ten-nant, A.F., Thomas, N.E., Tombesi, F., Trois, A., Turolla, R., Vink, J., Wu, K., Xie, F., 2024. Studying geometry of the ultraluminous X-ray pulsar Swift J0243.6 +6124 using X-ray and optical polarimetry. A&A 691, A123. doi: 10.1051/ 0004-6361/202450696 , arXiv:2405.08107 .Radhakrishnan, V., Cooke, D.J., 1969. Magnetic Poles and the Polarization Structure of Pulsar Radiation. ApJL 3, 225. Sasaki, M., Müller, D., Kraus, U., Ferrigno, C., Santangelo, A., 2012. Analysing X-ray pulsar profiles. Geometry and beam pattern of 4U 0115 +63 and V 0332 +53. A&A 540, A35. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201016304 .Sobolev, V.V., 1963. A treatise on radiative transfer. 22 Sokolova-Lapa, E., 2023. Radiative transfer in the vicin-ity of accreting neutron stars - polarized emission in strong magnetic fields. dissertation. Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg. URL: 

https://www.sternwarte.uni-erlangen.de/docs/ theses/2023-11_Sokolova-Lapa.pdf .Tsygankov, S.S., Doroshenko, V., Poutanen, J., Heyl, J., Mushtukov, A.A., Caiazzo, I., Di Marco, A., Forsblom, S.V., González-Caniulef, D., Klawin, M., La Monaca, F., Malacaria, C., Marshall, H.L., Muleri, F., Ng, M., Suleimanov, V.F., Sunyaev, R.A., Turolla, R., Agudo, I., Antonelli, L.A., Bachetti, M., Baldini, L., Baumgartner, W.H., Bellazzini, R., Bianchi, S., Bongiorno, S.D., Bonino, R., Brez, A., Bucciantini, N., Capitanio, F., Castellano, S., Cavazzuti, E., Ciprini, S., Costa, E., De Rosa, A., Del Monte, E., Di Gesu, L., Di Lalla, N., Donnarumma, I., Dovˇ ciak, M., Ehlert, S.R., Enoto, T., Evangelista, Y., Fabiani, S., Fer-razzoli, R., Garcia, J.A., Gunji, S., Hayashida, K., Iwakiri, W., Jorstad, S.G., Karas, V., Kitaguchi, T., Kolodziejczak, J.J., Krawczynski, H., Latronico, L., Liodakis, I., Maldera, S., Manfreda, A., Marin, F., Marinucci, A., Marscher, A.P., Matt, G., Mitsuishi, I., Mizuno, T., Ng, C.Y., O’Dell, S.L., Omodei, N., Oppedisano, C., Papitto, A., Pavlov, G.G., Peirson, A.L., Perri, M., Pesce-Rollins, M., Petrucci, P.O., Pilia, M., Possenti, A., Puccetti, S., Ramsey, B.D., Rankin, J., Ratheesh, A., Romani, R.W., Sgrò, C., Slane, P., Sof-fitta, P., Spandre, G., Tamagawa, T., Tavecchio, F., Tav-erna, R., Tawara, Y., Tennant, A.F., Thomas, N.E., Tombesi, F., Trois, A., Vink, J., Weisskopf, M.C., Wu, K., Xie, F., Zane, S., IXPE Collaboration, 2022. The X-Ray Polarime-try View of the Accreting Pulsar Cen X-3. ApJL 941, L14. doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aca486 , arXiv:2209.02447 .Tsygankov, S.S., Lutovinov, A.A., Doroshenko, V., Mushtukov, A.A., Suleimanov, V., Poutanen, J., 2016. Propeller e ff ect in two brightest transient X-ray pulsars: 4U 0115 +63 and V 0332 +53. A&A 593, A16. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/ 201628236 , arXiv:1602.03177 .Wilson-Hodge, C.A., Malacaria, C., Jenke, P.A., Jai-sawal, G.K., Kerr, M., Wol ff , M.T., Arzoumanian, Z., Chakrabarty, D., Doty, J.P., Gendreau, K.C., Guillot, S., Ho, W.C.G., LaMarr, B., Markwardt, C.B., Özel, F., Prigozhin, G.Y., Ray, P.S., Ramos-Lerate, M., Remillard, R.A., Strohmayer, T.E., Vezie, M.L., Wood, K.S., NICER Science Team, 2018. NICER and Fermi GBM Observa-tions of the First Galactic Ultraluminous X-Ray Pulsar Swift J0243.6 +6124. ApJ 863, 9. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ aace60 , arXiv:1806.10094 .23