Title: Granular mass perturbations on the pulsar - supermassive black hole system

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04762v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 01:15:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Granular mass perturbations on the pulsar – supermassive black hole system 

Zexin Hu 1, 2 and Lijing Shao 2, 3, ∗

> 1

Department of Astronomy, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

> 2

Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

> 3

National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 

(Dated: June 4, 2026) Discovery and timing observations of a radio pulsar orbiting around Sagittarius A*, the supermassive black hole (SMBH) in our Galactic Centre (GC), will provide unprecedented opportunities of studying the SMBH spacetime, testing gravity theories, and probing the astrophysical environment in the GC. However, unknown mass distributions might cause timing residuals that are much larger than the timing precision. With extensive numerical simulations, for the first time we find that the perturbations caused by a granular cusp of stellar-mass black holes in the GC lead to post-fit timing residuals of 10–100 s—contrary to traditional wisdom—even for a pulsar in a tight orbit with an orbital period Pb = 0.5 yr. Such a large timing residual can lead to significant measurement bias or even prevent construction of a phase-connected timing solution for the full orbit. We revisit the idea of extracting SMBH parameters only with data around periastron where the perturbation is small. Under the realistic phase-disconnected assumption, we point out that it is vital to consider the frame-dragging e ff ect in the light propagation, which breaks parameter degeneracy and leads to an order of magnitude improvement for the measurement precision of the SMBH spin. 

Introduction —As a key science goal of the Square Kilo-metre Array (SKA) [1–3], the discovery and timing observa-tions of a radio pulsar closely orbiting around Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*), the supermassive black hole (SMBH) dwelling at our Galactic Centre (GC), will provide unprecedented tests of general relativity (GR) [4, 5]. It also enables precision mea-surement of the SMBH [6–12], as well as its astrophysical en-vironment such as the dark matter distribution in GC [13–15]. The measurement of the SMBH spin is of particular interest as it is crucial for tests of the no-hair theorem and cosmic cen-sorship conjecture [1, 6]. Previous studies suggest that timing observation of a radio pulsar with an orbital period Pb ≲ 0.5 yr and an orbital eccentricity e ∼ 0.8 could measure the spin and quadrupole moment of Sgr A* to a relative precision of about 10 −3–10 −2 over a 5-yr time span with an assumed timing pre-cision of 1 ms [6–8, 13]. Despite theoretical models suggesting that there are a large population of pulsars in the GC [16–18], current observations have only found seven whose projected distances are within 100 pc from Sgr A* [19–23]. The lack of discovery in this region might be attributed to the strong scattering caused by the highly turbulent interstellar medium towards the GC. It is believed that future surveys at high frequency with better in-strument sensitivity will reveal the missing pulsar population. For the proposed gravity tests, a pulsar in a very tight or-bit around Sgr A* is needed [6]. The strict requirement of a pulsar with such a tight orbit mainly comes from two aspects. One is that a tight orbit provides stronger relativistic e ff ects, including the spin-orbit coupling e ff ectively at the 1 .5 post-Newtonian (PN) order and quadrupole at the 2 PN order. The other consideration is that a wide pulsar orbit is a ff ected by the complex astrophysical environment, such as the stellar cusp around Sgr A*. As discussed by Merritt et al. [24], these per-turbations might obscure the signal of spin-orbit coupling and quadrupole of the SMBH and make the desired tests of GR infeasible. In contrast, a tight orbit is expected to be domi-nated by the gravity of the SMBH and hopefully evades the complication from perturbations [6, 7]. Studying the orbital motion of S-stars around Sgr A* has provided a constraint on the extended mass distribution in the GC. At 1-σ level, the enclosed maximum mass (except the central SMBH) inside the S2 orbit is around 1000 M⊙ [25]. This mass is close to the predicted mass of the stellar cusp surrounding Sgr A*, which, at the scale of S2 orbit, is mainly contributed by the stellar-mass black holes (BHs) [26]. Dif-ferent from a smooth mass distribution like the dark matter, a granular one can cause much larger perturbations due to close encounters. It is predicted that continuous tracing of the S2 orbit will start to observe the granular mass perturbations if the extended mass is large enough and indeed mainly consists of stellar-mass BHs [27]. A possible way to evade the unknown perturbations for a pulsar with a moderate orbital period is to only use the timing data during the pulsar’s periastron passages [7]. For a pulsar in an eccentric orbit, the perturbations mainly a ff ect the pulsar during the apocenter part of the orbit, where the pulsar spends its most time. In contrast, for the pericenter passage, the pul-sar’s orbit is dominated by the SMBH. However, the mea-surement of the SMBH spin largely relies on the secular pre-cession caused by the spin-orbit coupling [28]. Perturbations around the apocenter might prevent construction of a phase-connected timing solution for those periastron passages, lead-ing to a worse measurement precision than expected [6–8, 13]. In this Letter , we present the first study of the timing resid-uals caused by granular mass perturbations for pulsars in tight orbits around Sgr A*. Compared to the expected timing pre-cision of the SKA, we find surprisingly large post-fit timing residuals, which suggest large systematic biases compared to statistical uncertainties on parameters. It might even prevent the construction of a phase-connected timing solution for the full pulsar orbit. Based on the realistic phase-disconnected as-sumption, we revisit the idea of using periastron-only timing 

> arXiv:2606.04762v1 [astro-ph.HE] 3 Jun 2026

2data to measure the SMBH spin. Our analytical and numer-ical results prove the importance of considering the frame-dragging (FD) e ff ect in light propagation, which is not in-cluded in the timing models used in previous studies [6–8, 13]. Observation of this e ff ect breaks a spin parameter degeneracy in periastron-only timing observation and enhances the spin precision by about an order of magnitude. 

Cluster model and simulations —As long predicted by stel-lar dynamics, there could exist a stellar cusp around Sgr A* due to mass segregation and two-body relaxation [29]. In a general model, this cluster is composed of several di ff er-ent populations, including main-sequence stars, white dwarfs, neutron stars, and BHs [30]. We take a simplified model and only focus on the stellar-mass BH component as they provide the main granular mass perturbation [27]. Low-mass stellar objects can be approximated by a smoother extended mass distribution, which mainly provides an additional periastron precession [13]. We assume the BH cusp to be composed of equal mass point particles with a power-law density distribu-tion ρ(r) ∝ r−2 around the central SMBH [30]. For a thermal-ized cluster, this gives a distribution of the semi-major axis a

and eccentricity e of the BH orbits as 

n(a, e) = 2eN /ame2 

> m

, a ∈ (0 , am) , e ∈ (0 , em) , (1) where am and em are the upper cuto ff s, and N controls the to-tal number of BHs. The orientations of the BH orbits are uni-formly distributed. The number of BHs is adjusted to fulfill the current constraint from S2, namely that inside the apocen-ter of S2, r0 = 9.4 mpc, the extended mass contributed by the BH cusp, Mext , should not significantly exceed 1000 M⊙ [25]. With the above distribution, as long as am ≥ r0/(1 − em), one then has N = Mext am/mr 0, where m is the BH mass. In our simulations, we choose em = 0.9 and correspond-ingly, am = 10 r0. Though BHs can have higher eccentricities as suggested by the eccentricity distribution of S-stars [31], this cuto ff does not alter our main results. In fact, a lower cuto ff reduces BHs in highly eccentric orbits that can move across the pulsar orbit, and gives a relatively smaller perturba-tion. We study four cases with di ff enerent m and Mext for the BH cusp, namely, m = 10 M⊙ or 50 M⊙ and Mext = 1000 M⊙

or 100 M⊙. The two cases with the larger Mext roughly repre-sent the upper limit of the granular mass perturbation, while the smaller Mext stands for more optimistic cases. We use Keplerian orbits for all BHs and only numerically integrate the pulsar’s motion. The equation of motion for the pulsar reads 

aPSR = aN + a1PN + a2PN + aS + aQ + aP , (2) where aN, a1PN , and a2PN are the PN expansion terms to 2 PN order, aS and aQ are the leading-order spin-orbit coupling and quadrupole terms of the SMBH, aP denotes the perturbation caused by the stellar-mass BHs where Newtonian gravity is assumed. Details of the timing model we developed are given in Ref. [12]. 

Timing residuals —Based on the numerically integrated or-bital motion of the pulsar, we obtain realistic times of ar-rival (TOAs) from the pulsar-SMBH system in the presence of granular perturbations. For the purpose of this work, we use zero noise injection. Fitting the simulated TOAs with a timing model without perturbation will then give us the unabsorbed timing residuals caused by the perturbations. In real observa-tions, a structured timing residual significantly larger than the timing precision usually suggests unmodeled physical e ff ects. Ignoring them in the timing model leads to significant param-eter estimation biases compared to statistical errors [32]. To give a statistical point of view of the possible timing residuals caused by the perturbations from the BH cusp, we randomly generate 1000 realizations of the BH cusp for each of the four cases mentioned before, while keeping same initial conditions for the pulsar orbit with Pb = 0.5 yr and e = 0.8. We consider an observational time span of 5 yr, which pro-vides a precise measurement of the SMBH parameters when there is no perturbation [6–8, 13]. In Fig. 1, we show the post-fit timing residuals for all these simulations and highlight their 68% and 95% percentile regions. From the figure, one can see that for Mext close to the upper limit given by the S2 star ob-servation, the post-fit timing residuals can be as large as 10 2 s. For Mext = 100 M⊙, the residuals are smaller but still much larger than the expected timing precision, which for the SKA, despite the large scattering caused by the dense interstellar medium in the GC, is better than σTOA = 1 ms [6]. We shall note that the post-fit timing residuals highly de-pend on the timing model that is used to fit the TOAs. Here we use the numerical timing model developed by Hu et al. 

[12] that consistently includes all 2 PN e ff ects. We only fit for the pulsar’s orbital and rotation parameters, as we will show that the SMBH parameters can be determined with periastron-only observations. Therefore, one can also regard the timing residuals in Fig. 1 as under the condition where the SMBH pa-rameters are unbiased. Additionally fitting the SMBH param-eters further reduces the residuals at the cost of introducing large biases in these parameters, which might be the case in real observations if the perturbations are not properly treated. Our results also suggest that, for an even tighter pulsar orbit like Pb = 0.1 yr, the post-fit timing residuals are not signifi-cantly smaller. In real timing observations, one does not know pulsar’s true rotation phase at the time of each TOA. Therefore, the tim-ing residuals in real observation will be folded into one pul-sar rotation period [33, 34], which is O(1) s for a normal pul-sar and shorter for millisecond pulsars. The timing residuals shown in Fig. 1 are phased-connected residuals, which means that we correctly add phase jumps to unwrap the folded tim-ing residuals. However, considering the larger timing residu-als compared to the pulsar’s rotation period, finding a phase-connected solution is quite challenging in reality. 

Periastron-only analysis —As shown, without further de-velopment of the timing model to include the granular mass perturbations, measuring the SMBH properties with data from the full pulsar orbit is problematic. Psaltis et al. [7] suggested 30 1 2 3 4 5

t [yr] 

−200 

−150 

−100 

−50 050 100 150 200 Residuals [s] 

> 95% percentiles 68% percentiles

0 1 2 3 4 5

t [yr] 

−60 

−40 

−20 020 40 60 Residuals [s]            

> 95% percentiles 68% percentiles
> m= 10 MMext = 1000 Mm= 10 MMext = 100 M

0 1 2 3 4 5

t [yr] 

−200 

−150 

−100 

−50 050 100 150 200 Residuals [s] 

> 95% percentiles 68% percentiles

0 1 2 3 4 5

t [yr] 

−60 

−40 

−20 020 40 60 Residuals [s]            

> 95% percentiles 68% percentiles
> m= 50 MMext = 1000 Mm= 50 MMext = 100 M

FIG. 1. Post-fit timing residuals with di ff erent m and Mext . Each gray line shows the result for one simulation, and contours highlight the 68% and 95% percentile regions from 1000 simulations. 

using periastron-only data to constrain the SMBH parameters, which might alleviate the perturbations. Here we revisit this idea. With numerical simulations, we show that the granular mass perturbations are indeed negligible in the periastron-only data. However, under a strong perturbation, we have shown that a phase-disconnected model should be adopted between orbits, giving a di ff erent expectation on the parameter mea-surement precision compared to Ref. [7]. When studying the possibility of using periastron-only tim-ing observations to measure the SMBH properties, we assume that the stellar perturbation is negligible, which is true for a pulsar in a highly eccentric and tight orbit. In Fig. 2, we show the post-fit timing residuals for the periastron-only tim-ing observation of a pulsar with Pb = 0.5 yr and e = 0.8under the perturbation of a BH cusp with m = 10 M⊙ and 

Mext = 1000 M⊙. The observation time window is about 

±0.05 Pb around the periastron as in Ref. [7]. Our results sug-gest that the post-fit timing residuals for periastron-only data are less structured and below ∼ 1 ms for the case even when the full orbit su ff ers a large perturbation. This timing resid-ual is comparable to the timing precision, and for a smaller 

Mext , the situation is even better. Therefore, the periastron-only observations indeed largely alleviate the perturbations. Note that, for this figure, we fit the full timing model includ-−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 

> t[day]
> −3
> −2
> −10123Residuals [ms]
> 95% percentiles 68% percentiles

FIG. 2. Post-fit timing residuals for periastron-only observation. We use a pulsar with Pb = 0.5 yr and e = 0.8, and a BH cusp with 

m = 10 M⊙ and Mext = 1000 M⊙. The observation time window is 

±0.05 Pb centered around the periastron passage. 

ing SMBH parameters as will be done in reality. We have shown that it is hard to find, and also improper to use, a phase-connected timing solution to describe the pulsar’s full orbit. A similar conclusion can be drawn for periastron-42 4 6 8 10             

> Nperi
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> δχ/χ
> Psaltis et al ., 2016 Phase -connected Disconnected w /o FD Disconnected w /FD
> FIG. 3. Fractional measurement precision of the dimensionless SMBH spin χversus the numbers of periastron passage. The tim-ing precision is assumed to be σTOA =100 μs. We show 1-σresults so that the solid blue curve is a factor of 2 smaller than the original curve in Fig. 7 of Psaltis et al. [7]. The blue dashed line is another factor of 2 smaller compared with the trend of our result.

only timing data. Due to the perturbations during the apoc-enter part of the orbit, each time the pulsar moves back to its pericenter, the orbital parameters of the pulsar are changed. As suggested by the large timing residuals in Fig. 1, this change is much larger than the statistical uncertainties. There-fore, to combine the data of multiple periastron passages, one should regard orbital parameters independent for each seg-ment. This argument simply leads to the fact that, the mea-surement precision of the SMBH parameters scale with the observed number of periastron passages as N−1/2peri .We assume a timing precision of σTOA = 100 μs as in Ref. [7]. The observation is supposed to be dense so that we assume three TOAs per day. Based on the timing model and the Fisher matrix approximation developed [12], we esti-mate the measurement precision of the SMBH parameters. In Fig. 3, we show the fractional precision of the dimensionless spin χ of the SMBH. Along with the more realistic results for phase-disconnected analysis, we also show results based on the phase-connected assumption, that is, assuming the pul-sar’s orbital parameters unchanged among all periastron pas-sages. One can see that our phase-connected result aligns well with the existing result [7] except for an overall factor of two, which might come from the detailed di ff erence in the timing model or parameter choice. The fast increase of the measure-ment precision across the first several periastron passages is a unique feature of (at least partially) phase-connected anal-ysis, as it relies on the measurement of secular e ff ects. The 

N−1/2peri scaling for the fully phase-disconnected results gives a much worse measurement precision as Nperi increases. Note that for a single periastron passage, the phase-connected and phase-disconnected models give same results. Despite the phase-disconnected analysis giving a much worse measurement precision of χ than traditional expecta-tion, we find that, including the FD e ff ect in light propaga-tion in the timing model, which was ignored in earlier studies, largely improves the result and leads to a spin measurement at the percent level as shown in Fig. 3. This improvement, present in the numerical evidence, is possibly caused by the breaking of an approximate spin parameter degeneracy in the periastron-only observation. To understand this degeneracy, we may first look at a sim-ilar but strict degeneracy in the FD e ff ect itself. The leading-order time delay of light propagation caused by the rotation of the SMBH is [28] 

∆FD = −χ 2G2 M2

c5

ˆs ·  ˆK0 × ˆn

r − z = f (S x, S y) , (3) where M is the mass of the SMBH, ˆ s is the direction of the SMBH spin S, and ˆ n = r/r points from SMBH to the pul-sar with r the radial distance; ˆK0 is the line of sight direction pointing from the Earth to Sgr A* and gives the z-direction so that z = ˆK0 · r. It is clear that, neglecting the proper motion of Sgr A* during the short periastron passage—which changes ˆK0—the time delay caused by the FD e ff ect only depends on the SMBH spin components in the x-y plane. Therefore, if only ∆FD is considered, it is impossible to measure S z. Equiv-alently, there will be an exact degeneracy in the spin parame-ters {χ, λ, η }, with λ and η giving the direction of S [12]. Similarly, if one only considers the time delay caused by the spin-orbit coupling, there is an approximate degeneracy in periastron-only analysis. The main contribution of the ad-ditional time delay caused by the spin-orbit coupling comes from the change of the R¨ omer delay and is roughly ∆SO ∼

ˆK0 ·   R dt R dt ′ aS

, where 

aS = χ 6G2 M2

c3r3

"

ˆs · ( ˆ n × v) ˆ n + ˙r( ˆ n × ˆs) − 23 (v × ˆs)

#

, (4) with v = ˙r [35]. In the duration of a pulsar in an eccentric orbit passing its periastron, the change in the direction ˆ n and ˆv will be much larger than the relative change in the velocity 

δv/v . Around the periaston, one has a negligible radial veloc-ity ˙ r compared to v. Further, around the pericenter, one has ˆn × ˆv ≈ ˆL with ˆ L the direction of the orbital angular momen-tum. We shall note that, strictly speaking, these assumptions are only valid for a small true anomaly. Therefore, the follow-ing analysis gives an approximation that depends on both the orbital eccentricity and observation time window. Taking into account the above approximations, one can put the time delay in the following form 

∆SO ∝

Z

dt 

Z

dt ′ h(S · ˆL) ˆ K0 + 2( ˆ K0 · ˆL)Si · ˆn . (5) Note that, despite the fact that there can be a small or-bital plane precession caused by the spin-orbit coupling, and changes in the orbital parameters caused by perturbations, ˆ n

is roughly changing only in the fixed plane of the pulsar orbit during the periastron passage. This suggests that ∆SO is nearly independent of the combination, (S · ˆL) ˆ K0 + 2( ˆ K0 · ˆL)S · ˆL.5Similar to the simpler but strict case of ∆FD we discussed be-fore, this leads to a degeneracy among spin parameters. Nev-ertheless, as the specific combination is clearly di ff erent from the combination f (S x, S y) for ∆FD , combining the two e ff ects largely breaks the degeneracies and leads to a much better spin measurement. Numerical result for a single periastron passage with the Fisher matrix suggests a clear decrease in the correlation among spin parameters. The absolute correla-tion ( |qχ,λ |, |qχ,η |, |qλ,η |) changes from (0 .999 , 0.995 , 0.998) to (0 .928 , 0.954 , 0.973) after considering the FD e ff ect. We note that, the FD e ff ect shows a similar feature to the so-called longitudinal deflection delay (or simply binding de-lay) [28, 36], which is related to the pulsar’s rotation. De-pending on the orientation of the pulsar’s rotation axis, the longitudinal deflection delay can have a similar amplitude as the FD e ff ect and a ff ect the spin measurement. If this is the case, combining scintillation observation to constrain the pul-sar rotation axis will be helpful. 

Discussions —In this Letter , for the first time, with detailed numerical simulations we estimate e ff ects of the perturbations caused by the BH cusp around Sgr A* for the timing observa-tion of a pulsar orbiting around Sgr A*, and reach the follow-ing important conclusions. First, with current constraints from S2 star observations, a reasonable BH cusp around Sgr A* can result in timing residuals that are much larger than the expected timing precision. With such large residuals, find-ing a phase-connected timing solution for the full pulsar orbit is challenging in reality. Second, revisiting the idea of using the periastron-only data, our results suggest that ignoring the perturbations during periastron passage is reasonable for most cases, but pulse phases are disconnected for subsequent orbits. Third, while the phase disconnection results in a worse mea-surement precision of the SMBH spin, we find that including the FD e ff ect in light propagation breaks a degeneracy of spin parameters in periastron-only analysis, and improves the mea-surement precision by about an order of magnitude, leading to a fractional uncertainty at the percent level. We point out the di ffi culties caused by the large timing residuals from granular mass perturbations. In principle, these timing residuals that are much larger than the timing preci-sion are all signals rather than noises , though a full model ac-counting for all the objects in the cusp is unrealistic due to the extremely large parameter space. Nevertheless, it would be worth developing a more comprehensive, probably hierarchi-cal, timing model to resolve these residuals in future observa-tions, as these residuals encode detailed information about the astrophysical environment around Sgr A*. Considering that the main contribution of the perturbations come from several relatively close encounters, including one or several additional orbits in the timing model may improve the fitting while keep-ing the number of parameters under control. We leave detailed analysis for a future study. We thank Norbert Wex for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (124B2056, 12573042), the National SKA Pro-gram of China (2020SKA0120300), the Beijing Natural Sci-ence Foundation (1242018), the Max Planck Partner Group Program funded by the Max Planck Society, and the High-performance Computing Platform of Peking University.