Title: Prospects of resolving and localising individual supermassive black hole binaries with pulsar timing arrays: the host ranking challenge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00218v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:09:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX) Preprint 2 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.0 

# Prospects of resolving and localising individual supermassive black hole binaries with pulsar timing arrays: the host ranking challenge 

# Niccolò Veronesi 1, ★ Maria Charisi 1,2, Polina Petrov 3, Stephen R. Taylor 3, Jessie Runnoe 3,4,Daniel J. D’Orazio 5,6,7, Jacob Pilawa 8,9, Chung-Pei Ma 8,9, 

> 1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washington State University, 1245 Webster Hall, Pullman, WA 99164, USA  

> 2

Institute of Astrophysics, FORTH, GR-71110, Heraklion, Greece  

> 3

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 37235, USA  

> 4

Fisk University, Department of Life and Physical Sciences, 1000 17th Avenue N, Nashville, TN 37208, USA  

> 5

Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Dr., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA  

> 6

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA 

> 7

, Niels Bohr International Academy, Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark 

> 8

, Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, 501 Campbell Hall #3411, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

> 9

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ 

ABSTRACT 

Pulsar Timing Arrays (PTAs) are soon expected to detect individually resolved supermassive black hole (SMBH) binaries, opening the possibility for multi-messenger discoveries. The biggest challenge will be to pinpoint the host galaxy in a large localisation area. We simulate realistic binary populations consistent with the gravitational wave (GW) background, projecting the PTA sensitivity for the next 0-10 years. We inject the loudest binary on top of the background and use one of the standard detection pipelines to constrain its properties. We cross-match the localisation areas with comprehensive all-sky galaxy catalogues and estimate the number of candidate hosts in the localisation area assessing, for the first time, the number of missing galaxies due to incomplete coverage. We develop a ranking system that excludes galaxies with properties inconsistent with the GW posteriors, and prioritizes the remaining galaxies for follow-up observations. We find a ≈21, ≈38 and ≈51 percent probability of resolving a binary in the next 0, 5 and 10 years, respectively, reduced to 0.3, 3.8 and 14.1 percent if we require potentially well-constrained localisation areas. The localisation areas span hundreds of square degrees, but shrink significantly with the addition of more data. They contain on average ≈190,000 early type galaxies and ≈40,000 active galactic nuclei, with ≈25,000 missing candidate hosts. Our ranking method can exclude about half of the potential hosts and efficiently rank those remaining when the galaxy catalogue provides SMBH masses and redshifts, but becomes more inefficient when we rely on apparent magnitudes. 

Key words: gravitational waves - transients: black hole mergers - galaxies: active - methods: statistical 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Pulsar timing arrays (PTAs) have recently found evidence for a stochastic background of gravitational waves (GWs) at nanohertz frequencies (Agazie et al. 2023a; EPTA Collaboration et al. 2023; Reardon et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Miles et al. 2025), the properties of which are compatible among different PTA datasets (Agazie et al. 2024). This signal is likely emitted by an unresolved population of supermassive black hole (SMBH) binaries, which are expected to form following the merger of their parent galaxies. Even though the main steps of binary evolution have been known for decades (Begel-man et al. 1980), the timescales over which binaries form and the processes that drive them to their final coalescence are still uncon-strained (Sesana 2015; Goicovic et al. 2017). Thanks to the addition of new monitored pulsars and increasing timing baselines, the sensitivity of PTAs is steadily improving. This  

> ★

E-mail: niccolo.veronesi@wsu.edu 

not only enables a more precise characterization of the stochastic background (which will improve our understanding of binary forma-tion and evolution), but may also eventually lead to the resolution of the loudest binaries (Rosado et al. 2015; Mingarelli et al. 2017; Kelley et al. 2018; Bécsy et al. 2022b; Gardiner et al. 2024). The isolation of GW signals on top of the background and their localisa-tion on the sky will trigger searches for their electromagnetic (EM) counterpart and the identification of the host galaxy. This, in turn, will enable multi-messenger analyses providing the most complete information on the physics of the system (Kelley et al. 2019; Charisi et al. 2026). The complementarity of the information carried by GWs and EM radiation will provide unprecedented insights onto topics such as the evolution of SMBH binaries in post-merger galaxies, and their dynamical interactions with their environment (Laal et al. 2025). The main challenge in identifying the host galaxy arises from the limited localisation capability of PTAs. The size of the 90 percent credibility level localisation area (A90) of the first individually re-solved SMBH binary is expected to be several hundreds of square 

© XXXX The Authors 

> arXiv:2606.00218v1 [astro-ph.GA] 29 May 2026

# 2 N. Veronesi et al. 

degrees (Sesana & Vecchio 2010; Goldstein et al. 2018, 2019; Petrov et al. 2024; Truant et al. 2025). It will thus contain a large number of potential hosts. However, the first resolvable source will likely have a large total mass ( 𝑀 tot ≳ 10 9 𝑀 ⊙ ) and will reside in a luminous mas-sive galaxy at relatively low redshift ( 𝑧 ≤ 0.5), at least if it is detected in the near-future (5-10 years). This significantly limits the number of candidate hosts (Goldstein et al. 2019; Petrov et al. 2024), miti-gating the probability of a false-positive association and enhancing our chances of finding the galaxy in which the PTA source resides. Another encouraging finding from previous studies is that the host of the first PTA detectable binary should be bright enough to be included in current all-sky EM surveys (Goldstein et al. 2019; Veronesi et al. 2025b; Truant et al. 2026). Therefore, the host is likely already present in an existing EM catalogue, as long as it is not situated in regions typically avoided due to high contamination from stars or dust, like the Galactic plane or the Magellanic Clouds. Here we quantify the impact of incomplete EM coverage on the host galaxy search. Finally, when it comes to EM observables, Veronesi et al. (2025b) demonstrated that one can use empirical scaling relations (e.g., Fer-rarese & Merritt 2000; McConnell & Ma 2013) to convert the pos-terior distribution of GW parameters (such as the chirp mass of the binary) into distributions of the apparent magnitudes of the host galaxy in several EM bands. Here we develop a method that leverages the above distributions to rank the candidates based on their likeli-hood of containing the GW-detected source. As we demonstrate in this work, the resulting ranked list of potential hosts can be used in subsequent searches for promising binary signatures (see, e.g., D’Orazio & Charisi 2023 for a review) to prioritize specific targets in follow-up studies likely employing both archival data and new observations. In this work, we simulate the projected sensitivity of future PTA datasets along with binary populations consistent with the GW back-ground to predict the properties of the first resolved source. We select binaries that could be localised in the next 5-10 years, but would have not show any evidence for their presence in the 15-year Data Set of the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav). We then estimate the size of A90 of the injected bi-naries using a standard PTA pipeline. Next, we cross-match the GW maps with two all-sky galaxy cata-logues containing: (1) quiescent early-type galaxies (ETGs), and (2) active galactic nuclei (AGN). These state-of-the-art catalogues are expected to be complete within the projected sensitivity volume of PTAs, especially for the expected massive hosts of the first resolved binaries. This allows us to obtain a realistic estimate of the number of candidate hosts within the localisation area, and, for the first time, quantify the limitations that come from the incomplete coverage of galaxy catalogues in sky regions with high contamination. Similarly to what has been first done in Goldstein et al. (2019), we construct a ranking system which sorts the candidate hosts, taking into account how well their positions and photometric properties match the pos-terior distributions constrained starting from standard PTA detection pipelines. We demonstrate that this method is capable of excluding galaxies that are found to be inconsistent with the PTA signal, using solely their photometric and astrometric properties. In Section 2, we describe our methodology. In particular, we present the PTA datasets we simulate and analyze, the EM cata-logues we use in cross-matches with the localisation areas, and the host ranking system. In Section 3, we present our results, and in Section 4 we discuss their implications for multi-messenger investi-gations, caveats of our method, and plans on how to address those in future works. Finally, in Section 5, we present our summary and conclusions. Whenever necessary, we convert redshift to luminosity distance from Earth assuming the cosmological parameters of the ob-servations by Planck (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020): 𝐻 0 =

67 .32 km s −1Mpc −1, Ω𝑚 ℎ2 = 0.14314 , and 𝑛 𝑠 = 0.96605 .

2 METHODOLOGY 

In this section, we describe the simulations of GW signals from binaries that can be resolved on top of the GW background and the data analysis pipeline that allows us to localise these sources. We describe the main properties of two all-sky EM catalogues (one containing only quiescent ETGs and one with only AGN) which we use to cross-match with the GW localisation areas. These have a high level of completeness up to 𝑧 ≈ 0.5, and likely include all the potential hosts of the PTA sources, with the exception of areas not covered due to stellar or dust contamination. We explicitly calculate the limitations that come from the incomplete sky coverage. We also present a ranking method that combines the galaxy sky location and photometric properties and sorts the candidate hosts based on which best matches our expectations with respect to the posteriors obtained from the PTA detection pipeline. 

2.1 Future PTA configurations 

To simulate the detection of SMBH binaries, we first construct PTAs that resemble our expectations for upcoming datasets from the Inter-national Pulsar Timing Array (IPTA). Similarly to our previous work in Veronesi et al. (2025b), we construct a first array called IPTA _20, denoting a total baseline of 20 years. This includes a total of 116 pul-sars, 68 of which are from the NANOGrav 15-year Data Set (NG15; Agazie et al. 2023b) 1, 31 from the first data release of the MeerKAT Pulsar Timing Array (MPTA; Miles et al. 2023), 14 from the first data release of the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array (PPTA; Zic et al. 2023), and 3 from the DRnew2+ data release of the European Pulsar Timing Array (EPTA) and the Indian Pulsar Timing Array (InPTA; EPTA Collaboration et al. 2023). This configuration is similar to the upcoming third data release of the IPTA. We also construct a PTA, with a total baseline of 25 years and 42 new pulsars added with respect to IPTA _20, which we will refer to as 

IPTA _25. The new pulsars are added at a rate of 7 pulsars per year, and are included in the dataset once their monitoring baseline reaches at least 3 years. The sky positions of the added pulsars are drawn from a kernel density estimation obtained from the positions of the 116 observed pulsars used in IPTA _20. IPTA _25 is our fiducial PTA configuration, which we use in most analyses. Finally, we explore how our results evolve in an extended PTA dataset, labeled as IPTA _30. This is constructed by adding 42 more pulsars (reaching a total of 200), with timing baselines extended by 5 more years, and a total baseline of 30 years. The positions of the new pulsars are extracted from the same kernel density estimation as in IPTA _25. We refer the reader to Section 2.1 of Veronesi et al. (2025b) for a more detailed description of the simulated PTAs for all the configu-rations presented above.   

> 1Only 67 pulsars were included in the search for the GW background, since the monitoring baseline of one pulsar was not consistent with the minimum requirement of at least 3 years of data. MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 3

2.2 Simulations of SMBH binary populations 

We simulate realistic binary populations to predict the expected prop-erties of the first resolved PTA source that could be detected in the near future (i.e. in IPTA _20, IPTA _25 or IPTA _30). We generate 1,000 realizations of SMBH binary populations, which are consis-tent with the stochastic GW background measured in NG15. These populations are built analogously to Agazie et al. (2023c), using semi-analytic models from the publicly available software package 

holodeck 2. Below we briefly summarize the main components of these models, but we refer the reader to Agazie et al. (2023c) for a complete explanation of the adopted analytical expressions, relevant parameters and their fixed values. We first model the galaxy stellar mass function using a Schechter profile, which provides the number density of galaxies as a function of their stellar mass and redshift. Next, we model the galaxy pair fraction and the galaxy merger time as functions of the galaxy stellar mass, redshift, and stellar mass ratio of the pair. These three functions combined provide the number density of galaxy mergers. We then proceed to populate these merging systems with SMBHs, the masses of which are correlated with different properties of the parent galaxies (Sato-Polito & Zaldarriaga 2025). For this, we use the scaling relation between the SMBH mass, 𝑀 SMBH , and the bulge mass of its host, 𝑀 b:

log 10 

 𝑀 SMBH 

𝑀 ⊙



= 𝜇 + 𝛼 𝜇 log 10 

 𝑀 b

10 11 𝑀 ⊙



+ N ( 0, 𝜖 𝜇 ), (1) where 𝜇 and 𝛼 𝜇 are the intercept and slope of this relation, and 

N ( 0, 𝜖 𝜇 ) indicates an intrinsic scatter given by a Gaussian with null mean and a standard deviation of 𝜖 𝜇 . Following the assumption made in Agazie et al. (2023c), we set the bulge stellar mass to 61.5 percent of the total stellar mass of the galaxy, based on empirical bulge mass measurements presented in Bluck et al. (2014) and in Lang et al. (2014). This value takes into account that, in the entire galaxy population, there are both elliptical galaxies entirely composed of their bulge, and spiral galaxies, in which only a fraction of the stellar mass is contained in the bulge. The above steps allow us to calculate the number density of SMBH pairs as a function of their total mass, mass ratio, and initial redshift. In practice, holodeck estimates the number density of pairs in a grid of these parameters. More specifically, the actual number of binaries in each cell of this three-dimensional (3D) parameter space is drawn from a Poissonian distribution around the expectation value calculated by integrating the differential number density over the cell volume. In this work, we consider a 3D grid with the following ranges and resolution: 

• Total mass, 𝑀 tot [𝑀 ⊙ ]: 10 4 − 10 12 , 720 bins; 

• Mass ratio, q: 10 −3 − 1, 160 bins; 

• Initial redshift, 𝑧 𝑖𝑛 : 10 −3 − 10 , 100 bins. While we use the ranges set as default in holodeck and used in the analysis of Agazie et al. (2023c), we increase the number of bins in total mass by a factor of 8 and in redshift by a factor of 2. This leads to a finer overall resolution of the sampled parameter space, while remaining computationally manageable (thanks to the significantly smaller number of binary populations required in this work compared to Agazie et al. 2023c). Finally, we evolve the SMBH binaries from very large separations to the PTA regime, using an empirical function to calculate how fast their separation 𝑎 decreases as a function of time. This hardening  

> 2https://github.com/nanograv/holodeck

rate is modeled using the following phenomenological double power law: 

𝑑𝑎 𝑑𝑡 = 𝐻 𝑎 ·

 𝑎 𝑎 𝑐 

1−𝜈 inner 

·



1 + 𝑎 𝑎 𝑐 

 𝜈 inner −𝜈 outer 

, (2) where the normalization 𝐻 𝑎 is calculated from the total binary life-time, and the critical separation 𝑎 𝑐 denotes the boundary between the two orbital decay regimes of the model. At large separations, the shrinking is governed by the exponent 𝜈 outer and encapsulates the evolution of the pair due the physical interactions with the sur-rounding environment, such as dynamical friction and three-body interactions with the stars. The exponent 𝜈 inner governs the regime of small separations, where the binary evolves primarily due to the emission of GWs and interactions with the surrounding gaseous envi-ronment. Each binary is then evolved until it reaches the PTA regime at a certain final redshift 𝑧 , which we use to calculate the luminos-ity distance from Earth in the observer’s reference frame. From this point on, when we refer to redshift we mean this quantity, regardless of the initial redshift at which the galaxy merger happened. The above models have six free parameters: the normalization of the galaxy stellar-mass function and its characteristic mass, the inter-cept 𝜇 of the scaling relation between bulge mass and SMBH mass and its intrinsic scatter 𝜖 𝜇 , the total binary lifetime, and the harden-ing power-law index that governs the evolution at small separations 

𝜈 inner . Each population is created by fixing the other parameters to the fiducial values assumed in Agazie et al. (2023c), and by draw-ing one sample from the 6-dimensional posterior distribution of the same paper, using the models with priors informed by observational measurements (i.e. the Phenom+Astro model, see the column corre-sponding to the Astrophysical Priors in Table B1 and the respective posteriors in Figure 9 of Agazie et al. 2023c). The simulated SMBH binary populations are therefore consistent with the GW background, as measured in NG15. Similarly to Agazie et al. (2023c), in our simulations we use 14 frequency bins (between 0.99 nHz and 28.71 nHz, each with a width of 1.98 nHz). The frequency grid is determined by the total baseline of NG15 ( 𝑇 data = 16 .03 yr, which corresponds to the time between the first and the last measured TOA of all monitored pulsars), with the upper limit of the 𝑖 -th bin defined as 𝑖 /𝑇 data . Each generated binary population is evolved to emit GWs in this frequency range. We note that to have full compatibility with previous works, such as Agazie et al. (2023c), we adopt the same frequency range of NG15, even if real searches with the baselines we employ will be able to detect binaries below it. For this reason, the numbers of detectable and localisable binaries presented in this work are to be considered lower limits. 

2.3 Selection of first resolvable PTA binaries 

Having generated 1,000 binary populations, we then select the loudest source of each population, i.e. the one that is more likely to be resolved first. For this, we first select the binary with the largest strain in each frequency bin. We examine each of these 14 binaries individually to determine which one has the highest signal to noise ratio (S/N) overall in the PTA configuration under consideration and will be injected as a resolved source in our simulations (see below). After removing the loudest source from each frequency bin, we calculate the total strain of the rest of the population as the square root of the sum of the square of the strains of the remaining binaries. We do this to establish the level of the background that we will inject in our simulations. In this step, we calculate the strain of the stochastic GW background, ℎbg , in the first five frequency bins. This is similar  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 4 N. Veronesi et al. 

to Agazie et al. (2023c), in which the population synthesis models were derived using 14 frequency bins, but the fit to the PTA data was done focusing only on the first five. This is because the GW background is fairly unconstrained at higher frequencies in NG15. We estimate the best-fit background amplitude, 𝐴 GWB , and spectral index, 𝛼 GWB , for each realization by performing a least-squares fit using a single power law ( ℎbg = 𝐴 GWB · 𝑓 𝛼 GWB ). We emphasize that the distribution of the background parameters we obtain from these fits ( 𝐴 GWB = −14 .75 ±0.19 , and 𝛾 GWB = 3−2·𝛼 GWB = 4.66 ±0.24 )3

are compatible both with those derived in the phenomenological models that we also employ here and with those constrained by the PTA data using the Hellings-Downs model (see Figure 7 of Agazie et al. 2023c). Therefore, the removal of the binary with the highest strain in each frequency bin does not introduce a significant bias in the simulated GW background. This likely means that the GW background is not dominated by the loudest sources in each bin (Agazie et al. 2025). The values obtained in this step are used in the rest of the analysis to generate the TOAs for the GW background and estimate the S/N of the resolved binaries we inject on top of this stochastic signal. Next, we calculate the S/N of the binaries with the highest strain for each frequency bin to select the one with the overall highest S/N in the population. For this, we generate the TOAs of pulsar signals for a realization of the GW background with the parameters from the fit above and then inject a continuous wave source with parame-ters of the respective binary, as obtained from holodeck . For each individual binary, we have the total mass, mass ratio, redshift, and GW frequency, but for the TOAs generation, we also need the sky location, inclination of the angular momentum vector with respect to our line of sight, GW initial phase, and GW polarization angle. We assume that the binaries are located in the most sensitive location of the IPTA _25 configuration (since this is our fiducial PTA). We note that the specific sky location is not important for the selection of the loudest binary, since at this stage we are interested in find-ing the highest S/N among the ones of the 14 binaries we examine for each population. The most sensitive sky location is obtained by following the process described in Veronesi et al. (2025b), practi-cally injecting a test binary with fixed parameters in the centres of all the pixels of a Hierarchical Equal Area isoLatitude Pixelisation (Healpix) projection with NSide = 4 and determining their S/N. Once the loudest binary for each population is selected, we inject it at a random sky location and re-calculate its S/N. To each binary we assign a random value of phase, polarization angle, and inclination. We consider a binary to be detectable if it reaches S/N = 4 4. However, in this work we are mainly interested in sources that have a S/N high enough not only to be confidently detected above the background, but also to be localised in the sky with enough precision to allow EM searches for the host galaxy. For this purpose, we select binaries with S/N ≥ 8, since this is roughly the threshold that typically leads to well defined posteriors on the binary sky location (Sesana & Vecchio 2010; Taylor et al. 2016; Petrov et al. 2024). We also take into account that, in the realization of the Universe we live in, we have not found any evidence for an individual SMBH binary in the existing PTA datasets. Therefore, we require that these binaries also have an 𝑆 /𝑁 < 4 in NG15.     

> 3We report the value of 𝛾 GWB to allow a direct comparison with the results of Agazie et al. 2023c.
> 4The choice of this S/N threshold is slightly arbitrary, since, in reality, detection statistics do not rely on a simple S/N measurement, but thresholds in the range of 3 ≤S/N ≤5 are typical in similar studies (e.g., Truant et al. 2025). Assuming a different threshold would not significantly alter our conclusions.

The sky positions and the S/N of the selected sources are shown in Figure 1. The marker color represents the S/N of the binary in 

IPTA _25, while its size is proportional to the total mass of the sys-tem. The gray area delineates the Galactic plane, i.e. regions with a Galactic latitude |𝑏 | ≤ 10 ◦. We show the positions of the sources detectable by IPTA _25 but not by NG15 with blue squares. The posi-tions of the loudest binaries of the remaining populations are marked by gray squares. The pink stars mark the positions of the pulsars we use in our fiducial configuration. The ones with black outline indicate the 42 pulsars not present in IPTA _20. The main properties (total mass, luminosity distance from Earth, frequency of their GW signal, and mass ratio) of the selected binaries are shown by the round markers in Figure 2, which are color-coded as in Figure 1. We discuss the distribution and the properties of the selected binaries in further detail in Section 3. For the sub-set of binaries that can be localised in IPTA _25 (high-lighted with the colored round markers in the figures above), we also explore how their properties and localisation area are constrained in 

IPTA _30. 

2.4 Estimation of binary parameters and host properties 

For each population in which the loudest source is consistent with the criteria described above (i.e. 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8 in IPTA _25 and 𝑆 /𝑁 < 4 in NG15) we use the enterprise software package (Ellis et al. 2020) to inject a realization of common uncorrelated red noise which repre-sents the GW background, following the process described in Section 2.3, and a continuous wave source with the properties of the loudest binary of the respective population. To estimate the detectability of the sources, the times of arrival (TOAs) are simulated for all 3 PTA configurations we describe in Section 2.1. For the subset of bina-ries with 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8 in IPTA _25, we perform an all-sky search for a continuous wave, using the QuickCW package (Bécsy et al. 2022a). The same analysis is then repeated for the same subset of binaries in IPTA _30. The pipeline estimates posterior distributions for the binary parameters, including its sky coordinates, thus allowing us to constrain the size and shape of A90. In particular, we run parallel tempered Monte Carlo Markov Chains (MCMCs) with 10 individual chains, a maximum temperature parameter of 5, a total of 1 billion steps, and store one step every 1,000. We use log-uniform priors for the frequency 𝑓 : [0.5, 100 ] nHz, the chirp mass M: [10 7, 10 11 ] 𝑀 ⊙ ,the strain ℎ0: [10 −18 , 10 −11 ], and the amplitude of the GW back-ground 𝐴 GWB : [10 −20 , 10 −11 ]. We use uniform priors for the GW background spectral index 𝛾 GWB : [0, 7], the phase of the binary’s orbit: [0, 2𝜋 ], the polarization angle: [0, 𝜋 ], and the cosine of the inclination between the orbital angular momentum and the line of sight: [− 1, 1]. For the two angular coordinates on the sky, we use uniform priors for the cosine of the polar angle: cos (𝜃 ) ∈ [− 1, 1]

and the azimuthal angle: 𝜙 ∈ [ 0, 2𝜋 ]. These angular coordinates are then converted to equatorial coordinates, right ascension RA = 𝜙 and declination Dec = 𝜋 /2 − 𝜃 . The posterior distribution of each source parameter is then represented by the samples of the chain with the lowest temperature, with the first 25 percent of the samples discarded as burn-in .In order to produce a well-defined map of the sky localisation, we associate each posterior sample of the sky coordinates to a pixel of an Healpix map with NSide = 32. This mapping divides the sky in a total of 12,288 pixels of equal area ( ≈ 3.36 deg 2). We sort the pixels in descending order based on the number of posterior samples they contain. The localisation area, A90, is then defined as the ensemble of pixels that contain 90 percent of the total number of samples. We calculate the size of the localisation area, A90, by multiplying the  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 50∘

# 90 ∘

# 180 ∘

# 270 ∘

# 30 ∘

# 60 ∘

# −60 ∘

# −30 ∘

# 45 ∘

# 135 ∘

# 225 ∘

# 315 ∘

Figure 1. Mollweide projection of the positions of binaries (round markers) that, while not detectable by NG15 ( 𝑆 /𝑁 < 4), are potentially localisable by 

IPTA _25 ( 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8), color-coded according to their S/N in IPTA _25. The size of the markers is proportional to the total binary mass. The squares mark the position of the loudest binary in each of the 1,000 populations we have created, with the blue ones indicating the sources among them that, while not detectable in NG15, would be detectable, but not potentially localisable ( 4 ≤ S/N < 8), in IPTA _25. The gray shaded area marks the Galactic plane, i.e. the region with Galactic latitude |𝑏 | ≤ 10 ◦. The pink stars with no outline show the pulsars in IPTA _20, while the ones with black outlines indicate the 42 pulsars that are added in IPTA _25. 

Figure 2. Properties of the binaries that are not detectable in NG15, but are potentially localisable in IPTA _25 (round markers), color-coded by their S/N. The shape and the color-code of all markers are the same as in Figure 1. The upper left panel shows the luminosity distance from Earth (and redshift) of the source as a function of its total mass, the upper right panel shows the total mass as a function of the GW frequency, and the lower panel shows the total mass as a function of the mass ratio. MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX) 6 N. Veronesi et al. 

number of pixels by the pixel area. We then identify potential hosts by cross-matching this localisation area with two all-sky catalogues containing ETGs and AGN (see below for details). To incorporate the EM information of the galaxy catalogues in our host search, we convert the posterior distributions obtained with 

QuickCW into distributions of EM observables. The chosen EM quan-tities depend on the information that is available in each galaxy catalogue. In particular, the ETG catalogue provides values of the redshift, which can be converted into luminosity distance 𝑑 lum , and of the stellar mass of the galaxy, which we convert into the mass of the central SMBH and associate to the binary total mass, 𝑀 tot . On the other hand, the AGN catalogue lists the apparent magnitudes in the W1 band, 𝑚 W1 ,AGN , for each source. 

QuickCW provides posterior distributions for M, 𝑓 , and ℎ0 of the source (in addition to sky coordinates, inclination, GW phase, and polarization angle). We use the above 3 quantities to create a 2-dimensional posterior distribution of the total mass and luminosity distance 𝑝 (𝑀 tot , 𝑑 lum ), which can be linked to the quantities available in the EM catalogues. For this, we employ a rejection sampling method, like in Petrov et al. (2024) and Veronesi et al. (2025b). First, we calculate the distribution of luminosity distance, 𝑑 lum 

from the posterior samples of QuickCW :

𝑑 lum = 2 (GM) 5/3 (𝜋 𝑓 )2/3

𝑐 4 ℎ0

, (3) where G is the gravitational constant and 𝑐 is the speed of light in vacuum. Then we linearly interpolate the resulting 2D probability density distribution 𝑝 (M , 𝑑 lum ), without marginalizing over 𝑓 and 

ℎ0.We then randomly sample a value for the parameters M, 𝑓 , and ℎ0,drawing from the same priors as in the MCMC analysis to calculate a random draw in luminosity distance, 𝑑 lum ,rand , from Equation 3. We then calculate a value of the chirp mass, Mrand , drawing from a uniform distribution of the mass ratio 𝑞 , 𝑞 :[0.1, 1], and a uniform distribution for the total mass 𝑀 tot . For the latter, the boundaries are set by combining the prior boundaries for 𝑞 and M, using the definition of the chirp mass: 

𝑀 tot = M 𝑞 −3/5

(1 + 𝑞 )−6/5 . (4) This ensures that the random values 𝑀 tot ,rand are extracted from a distribution that covers the entire range derived from the ranges of the two mass-related parameters used in the MCMC analysis. We then draw a random number, 𝑁 rand , between 0 and the max-imum value of the interpolated 𝑝 (M , 𝑑 lum ), and reject the random sample  Mrand , 𝑑 lum ,rand 

, if 𝑁 rand > 𝑝  Mrand , 𝑑 lum ,rand 

. We re-peat this until the number of non-rejected samples is equal to the number of posterior samples from QuickCW . The result is a joint 

𝑝 (𝑀 tot , 𝑑 lum ) posterior composed of all the non-rejected 𝑑 lum ,rand 

and 𝑀 tot ,rand samples. As mentioned above, we can directly link these to quantities in the ETG catalogue, and thus we can use the above joint distribution to rank the ETGs within the localisation area. However, in order to perform a similar ranking for the AGN cat-alogue we present in Section 2.5.2, we convert 𝑝 (𝑀 tot , 𝑑 lum ) into a distribution of apparent magnitude in the W1 band, 𝑝  𝑚 W1 ,AGN 

,taking into account the uncertainties and the scatter of the relations we use in the conversion. We do so by first estimating the Eddington luminosity 𝐿 Edd of an AGN with a mass of 𝑀 tot :

𝐿 Edd ∼ 1.26 · 10 38 Mtot 

M⊙

erg s −1. (5) For each sample of total mass, we also draw a value for the Edding-ton fraction 𝜆 Edd from distributions derived from Wu & Shen (2022). This catalogue uses quasar spectra from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 16 (Lyke et al. 2020) and provides estimates for prop-erties, such as 𝜆 Edd , and the SMBH mass, which here we associate to the total mass of the binary, 𝑀 tot . For each value of 𝑀 tot , we select the quasars from Wu & Shen (2022) with an estimated SMBH total mass log 10 𝑀 tot ± 0.05 and randomly draw the value for 𝜆 Edd of one of these objects to calculate the bolometric luminosity: 

𝐿 bol = 𝜆 Edd · 𝐿 Edd . (6) Following Veronesi et al. (2025b), we combine the spectral en-ergy distributions from Shang et al. (2011) with information regard-ing quasar bolometric luminosities and redshifts from Runnoe et al. (2012) to obtain a distribution of bolometric corrections in the W1 band. We then draw one sample from this distribution and multiply the bolometric luminosity 𝐿 bol by it to obtain the W1 luminosity 

𝜈 W1 𝐿 𝜈 W1 of the potential AGN host. From this luminosity, we then calculate the absolute magnitude 𝑀 W1 using the same standard pro-cess as in Section 3.2 of Veronesi et al. (2025b). Finally, we calculate the apparent magnitude using the value of 𝑑 lum which corresponds to the same posterior sample of the 𝑀 tot value used to calculate 𝑀 W1 :

𝑚 W1 = 𝑀 W1 + 5 log 

 𝑑 lum 

Mpc 



+ 25 + 0.171 · 𝐴 𝑉 , (7) where 𝐴 𝑉 is the dust extinction in the visible band, which we multiply by 0.171 to convert it to that in the W1 band (Cardelli et al. 1989). Analogously to Veronesi et al. (2025b), we use 𝐴 𝑉 ≈ 0.19 as the fiducial value, corresponding to the median value of the extinction across the sky obtained from the map presented in Chiang (2023). 

2.5 Galaxy catalogues 

We cross match the GW localisation areas with two all-sky galaxy catalogues, one containing only ETGs and the other containing only AGN. These catalogues are used in parallel in our analysis. Below we briefly describe their construction and essential EM properties, that we take into account in the host ranking system. We emphasize that the simulated binaries have a luminosity dis-tance from Earth dictated by the population synthesis models de-scribed in Section 2.2 and they are placed in a random sky location during the binary selection process in Section 2.3. Therefore, the bi-nary is not associated with any real galaxy in any of the two EM cat-alogues. However, our goal here is to assess the number of potential hosts in future multi-messenger searches in a realistic scenario, i.e., examining a binary from a realistic binary population, detected and localised with one of the standard PTA pipelines and cross-matched with all-sky catalogues of high completeness, while incorporating uncertainties both from the GW analysis and the EM catalogues. This also allows us to estimate what fraction of the GW sky maps lies within the footprint of such EM surveys, and assess our ability to rank the candidate hosts based on their EM properties. In future studies, we will repeat this analysis injecting the selected binaries in true galaxies, and we will check how high the true host is ranked with respect to the sorted list of all potential hosts, therefore estimating the accuracy of the ranking method. In this work we estimate its precision. 

2.5.1 The ETG catalogue 

The ETG catalogue is composed of the Two Micron All Sky Sur-vey Photometric Redshift catalogue (2MPZ, Bilicki et al. 2014), and  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 7

of the WISExSuperCOSMOS Photometric Redshift catalogue (WI-SExSCOS, Bilicki et al. 2016). It contains 19,586,966 photometri-cally selected galaxies, each with an estimated value of photometric redshift and stellar mass. Every object was detected both by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE, Wright et al. 2010) and by the SuperCOSMOS Sky Survey (Hambly et al. 2001), but the brightest objects (i.e. the ones with an infrared magnitude 𝑚 W1 ≤ 13 .8), which were also detected by the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS, Cutri et al. 2003), are contained in 2MPZ and not in WISExSCOS. The combination process and the estimation of the stellar mass of each galaxy is described in detail Pilawa et al. (tion). In brief, the stellar mass is calculated from its intrinsic luminosity in the W1 band, using the correlation between the mass-to-light ratio and the W1-W2 color from Cluver et al. (2014). We use the stellar mass estimates to calculate the mass of the SMBHs (which we associate with the total mass of the binary), assuming that all the stars are contained in the bulge. For this, we use the scaling relation of Equation 1, adopting in this case the best-fit parameters calculated in McConnell & Ma (2013): 𝜇 = 8.46 ± 0.08 , 𝛼 𝜇 = 1.05 ± 0.11 , and intrinsic scatter 𝜖 𝜇 = 0.34 . We note that the estimates on the galaxy stellar mass obtained from the W1 magnitude are found to be systematically lower ( ≈ 0.3 dex) than the ones obtained from the magnitude in the K band for the objects that have a detection both in WISE and in 2MASS (Pilawa et al. tion). Future versions of the ETG catalogue we use, not available at the time of writing, will contain stellar mass estimates for all the galaxies corrected taking into account this discrepancy, since the K magnitude is considered to be the one that best relates to such galaxy property. Higher estimates of stellar masses will lead to higher estimates of total binary masses. This will not change the number of potential host candidates, but will moderately decrease the rejection rate of ranking methods such as the one presented in this work, since fewer galaxies will be found incompatible with the typically large values of 𝑀 tot estimated from the GW pipelines. The ranking system presented in Section 2.6 requires an estimate of the uncertainty for each employed quantity, i.e. the redshift and the mass of the central SMBHs for this catalogue. To estimate the uncertainty 𝜎 𝑧 on the photometric redshift, we use the prescriptions from Turski et al. (2023). Specifically, we use 𝜎 𝑧 = 0.052 ·𝑧 +0.008 , if the parent catalogue of the object is 2MPZ, and 𝜎 𝑧 = 0.085 ·𝑧 +0.019 ,if it is in WISExSCOS. For the uncertainty on the SMBH mass, 𝜎 𝑀 tot ,we use standard rules of error propagation: 

𝜎 2 

> 𝑀 tot

= 𝜇 2𝜎 2 

> 𝑀 b

+ 𝜎 2 

> 𝜇

(𝑀 b − 11 )2

+ 𝜎 2 

> 𝛼 𝜇

+ 𝜖 2 

> 𝜇

, (8) where 𝜎 𝜇 and 𝜎 𝛼 𝜇 are the uncertainties of the best fit parameters in the scaling relation of McConnell & Ma (2013), and 𝜎 𝑀 b is the intrinsic scatter of the correlation used to calculate the bulge mass, which here we set to 𝜎 𝑀 b = 0.1 based on Fig. 6b of Cluver et al. (2014) 5.We note that 2MPZ covers some areas that are avoided in WISExS-COS, especially in regions with low Galactic latitude. To guarantee uniformity when cross-matching with GW sky maps, we exclude the regions covered by 2MPZ but not by WISExSCOS, which are highly incomplete. In practice, this corresponds to rejecting sky regions where the pixels of the Healpix map with NSide = 32 have fewer than 415 objects. After excluding these areas, we are left with a total     

> 5The value of 𝜎 𝑀 bis not explicitly stated in Cluver et al. (2014), and therefore we obtain an estimate of 0.1 based on visual inspection of the aforementioned Figure 6b. Small deviations from this value are not expected to significantly affect our results. 0∘
> 90 ∘
> 180 ∘
> 270 ∘
> 30 ∘
> 60 ∘
> −60 ∘
> −30 ∘
> 45 ∘
> 135 ∘
> 225 ∘
> 315 ∘0∘
> 90 ∘
> 180 ∘
> 270 ∘
> 30 ∘
> 60 ∘
> −60 ∘
> −30 ∘
> 45 ∘
> 135 ∘
> 225 ∘
> 315 ∘
> Figure 3. Mollweide projection of the all-sky catalogues of ETGs (upper panel) and AGN (lower panel ) used in this work. The colour of each pixel denotes the number of objects it contains in an Healpix projection with NSide=32.

of 19,364,973 ETGs, the sky distribution of which is shown in the upper panel of Figure 3. 

2.5.2 The AGN catalogue 

From the ETG galaxy catalogue candidate AGN have been discarded (through color-based selection), so we use a complementary cata-logue to include potential AGN hosts. In this work, we remain ag-nostic about the a priori probability of a PTA source being associated with a specific type of host (e.g., see Truant et al. 2026), and perform our analysis for the ETG and AGN catalogues in parallel. We use an AGN catalogue from Assef et al. (2018), which contains a total of 4,543,530 objects detected by WISE, present in the All-WISE Data Release. For each entry the catalogue contains the mea-sured apparent magnitudes the infrared bands of WISE, and their photometric uncertainties. They are identified as AGN candidates with 90 percent reliability (comprising the so-called R90 catalogue) using a cut based on the 𝑊 1 and 𝑊 2 magnitudes: 

W1 − W2 > 0.662 · 𝑒 0.232 (W2 −13 .97 )2

. (9) The R90 catalogue has a high level of uniformity and reliability. Typically, such catalogues have to compromise on completeness to achieve high reliability, but since we are interested in massive bi-naries, which live in luminous hosts, completeness is likely not a significant limitation. In the lower panel of Figure 3, we show the sky distribution of the AGN in this catalogue. The over-dense regions in the southern hemisphere are caused by the survey strategy which was adopted to correct for the decreased sensitivity in the south Atlantic anomaly (see Section 3.3.2 of Assef et al. 2018 for details). These over-densities are present only for  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 8 N. Veronesi et al. 

faint sources (with a 𝑆 /𝑁 < 10 in the W2 band) and their inclusion has therefore minimal impact on our results, but a future study may consider a more careful selection. We note that when comparing the total number of objects in the AGN and ETG catalogues, we find the former to be ≈ 23 .5 percent of the latter. This number is higher than the typical AGN fraction (Kauffmann et al. 2003), because R90 is deeper than the ETG cat-alogue, with the former containing objects with 𝑚 W1 > 19 , and the latter imposing a limiting W1 magnitude of 17 to achieve higher uniformity (Bilicki et al. 2016). 

2.6 Host ranking system 

In this section, we present the system we develop to rank the potential host galaxies. To each galaxy (ETG or AGN, separately) within the localisation area, we associate a host score H , which we define as follows: 

H = 𝑝 sky · 𝑝 cat , (10) where 𝑝 sky and 𝑝 cat are probability density values that estimate how well the candidate host properties match the posteriors of the detected PTA source. The factor 𝑝 sky measures how well the host sky position matches the GW sky map, and 𝑝 cat = Î𝑥 𝑝 𝑥 is its equivalent for the other host properties 𝑥 we consider. In particular, for ETGs the additional information we use is the estimated total mass of their SMBH and their luminosity distance calculated from the redshift, (𝑝 cat ,ETG = 𝑝 𝑀 tot · 𝑝 𝑑 lum ), while for AGN we rely on their apparent W1 magnitude ( 𝑝 cat ,AGN = 𝑝 𝑚 W1 ,AGN ), since in state-of-the-art AGN all-sky catalogues with homogeneous completeness (necessary for this type of analyses), the total mass of the central SMBH and the redshift are not separately listed. The value of 𝑝 𝑥 is proportional to the probability of measuring the two distributions of the property 𝑥 

(one from the GW analysis and one from the EM catalogue) assuming that the underlying true value of 𝑥 is the same for both of them. We calculate 𝑝 sky for each candidate host by first identifying the pixel within A90 in which the galaxy is located (keeping the reso-lution of NSide=32 throughout the analysis). Then we calculate the probability density of the PTA source being associated with that pixel, 𝑝 sky , dividing the number of posterior samples of that pixel by the total number of samples. While the derivation of 𝑝 sky is straightforward, since the uncer-tainty in the sky coordinates of the galaxies is negligible, the un-certainty on the redshift and on the EM observables needs to be ac-counted for in calculating 𝑝 𝑥 , and thus requires a different approach. For each property 𝑥 , we calculate 𝑝 𝑥 for each potential host by first creating a difference distribution composed of 10,000 samples of the quantity Δ𝑥 . Each sample is the difference between one random value drawn from the GW-posterior-derived distribution of the observable 

𝑥 and one drawn from a Gaussian with mean and standard deviation taken from the EM catalogue for the specific candidate host under consideration. We approximate the above probability density function, 𝑝 (Δ𝑥 ),with a kernel density estimation and then draw 1,000 samples to calculate the probability to exceed, PTE 𝑥 , as: 

PTE 𝑥 =

> 1000

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

Θ  𝑝 (Δ𝑥 = 0) − 𝑝  Δ𝑥,𝑖 

 , (11) where Θ indicates the Heaviside step function (which returns 0 for negative values, and 1 for positive ones), and Δ𝑥,𝑖 is the 𝑖 -th random draw from 𝑝 (Δ𝑥 ). The value of PTE 𝑥 therefore denotes the proba-bility of extracting from 𝑝 (Δ𝑥 ) a value of Δ𝑥 that has an associated probability density higher than the one associated to Δ𝑥 = 0. If the underlying value of 𝑥 was the same for the two distributions, 𝑝 (Δ𝑥 )

would peak at zero, and for this reason PTE 𝑥 would be null. However, for different starting distributions, PTE 𝑥 will be positive. The higher the value of PTE 𝑥 , the more the two starting distributions differ. We then use the value of PTE 𝑥 to define a sigma equivalent 𝜎 eq ,𝑥 .An intuitive definition of this quantity is the following: if the galaxy under consideration is the true host, the observed difference in the two distributions of the observable 𝑥 (i.e. the one derived from the GW posteriors and the Gaussian parametrized by the mean and the standard deviation from the catalogue or calculated as in Section 2.5.1) is as likely to obtain as a random draw from a Gaussian dis-tribution with distance from the mean equal to a number 𝜎 eq ,𝑥 of standard deviations. This quantity is calculated by inverting the fol-lowing relation: 

PTE 𝑥 = 𝑝  |𝑍 | ≥ 𝜎 eq ,𝑥 

 , (12) where 𝑍 is a random draw from a Gaussian distribution of null mean and a standard deviation of 1. The value of 𝜎 eq ,𝑥 is therefore the one that has a probability of PTE 𝑥 to be smaller (in absolute value) than a random draw of the function 𝑍 is extracted from. Inverting the equation therefore leads to: 

𝜎 eq ,𝑥 = √2 · erf −1 (1 − PTE 𝑥 ), (13) where erf denotes the error function. We can use 𝜎 eq ,𝑥 to calculate the probability density 𝑝 𝑥 , as the probability density associated to it assuming a normal Gaussian dis-tribution: 

𝑝 𝑥 =√︂ 2

𝜋 𝑒 − 𝜎 2eq ,𝑥  

> 2

. (14) Putting everything together, for every ETG within the localisation area A90, we calculate the ETG host score as: 

HETG = 𝑝 sky · 𝑒 − 𝜎 2eq ,𝑀 tot 2 · 𝑒 − 

> 𝜎 2eq ,𝑑 lum 2

, (15) and similarly for every AGN within the same sky region, we calculate the AGN host score as: 

HAGN = 𝑝 sky · 𝑒 − 𝜎 2eq ,𝑚 W1 ,AGN 2 , (16) We drop the √︃ 2 

> 𝜋

factor, because it is common to all ETGs and AGN. We emphasize that we are constructing a ranking system that assigns a score to every potential host within A90 to rank them. However, the values of these scores do not correspond to an absolute probability density of an object being the true host. Moreover, the ranking is relative within each catalogue, because the two scores have been calculated separately and have different normalizations. This means that if an ETG has a higher score with respect to an AGN, it does not necessarily imply that the former is more likely to host the binary with respect to the latter. The only factor that allows a direct comparison between the two host types is 𝑝 sky .Finally, to quantify the efficiency of the ranking system, for each localised binary, we calculate the ratio between the 95-th percentile of the host score distribution and its median. We further refer to this efficiency parameter as E95 −50 , and its value expresses how much more likely the top performing candidates are to be the true host, compared to the typical candidate within A90. A higher value of 

E95 −50 therefore indicates a better ability to select the best candidates, and a higher efficiency of the ranking system. This value is calculated for ETGs and AGN, separately, for the well-localised binaries both in IPTA _25 and IPTA _30.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 9

3 RESULTS 3.1 Selection of detectable and localisable binaries 

We create 1,000 realizations of binary populations and select the loudest binary for each population. We place these binaries in ran-dom sky positions and examine their detectability in IPTA _20 and 

IPTA _25. We select binaries that have 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 4, while not being detectable in NG15. We find that a total of 212 and 378 binaries pass this detectability selection for IPTA _20 and IPTA _25, respectively. Therefore, given our simulations of upcoming PTA sensitivities and our models for the binary population, we estimate the probability of resolving a binary in an upcoming IPTA dataset with a baseline of 20 and 25 years to be 21.2 and 37.8 percent, respectively. However, we emphasize that the S/N threshold is only a proxy for the detection statistics employed in PTA searches, and these probabilities should be interpreted only as rough estimates. The binaries that pass the detection threshold in IPTA _25 are highlighted with blue squares in Figures 1 and 2, while the re-maining population of loudest binaries is shown with gray squares. We see that the detectable sources are isotropically distributed on the sky and have properties (distance and total mass) statisti-cally indistinguishable from the overall population. Specifically, the 25 −𝑡ℎ , 50 −𝑡ℎ , and 75 −𝑡ℎ percentiles for the luminosity distance are 

log 10 (𝑑 lum /Mpc ) = 2.65 2.96 2.28 , where the main reported value indi-cates the median, while the subscript and the superscript the two other quartiles. The same percentiles for the total binary mass are 

log 10 (𝑀 tot /𝑀 ⊙ ) = 9.72 9.95 9.50 . These sources tend to have low frequen-cies, with ≈ 64 percent of the detectable binaries distributed in the first 5 of the 14 frequency bins. A similar result is found for IPTA _20, where ≈ 69 percent of detectable binaries are in that frequency range. The above values for the detectable binaries are broadly in agree-ment with findings in previous studies (Rosado et al. 2015; Bécsy et al. 2022b; Gardiner et al. 2025). This is true even if the population synthesis models and the employed selection criteria are different among studies. We acknowledge that we find a non-negligible frac-tion of detectable binaries with masses comparable with (or higher than) 10 10 𝑀 ⊙ . SMBHs with such high masses are present in the local Universe, albeit relatively rare. For example, the MASSIVE survey (Ma et al. 2014) has identified 116 ETGs with stellar masses bigger than 4 · 10 11 𝑀 ⊙ within 108 Mpc from Earth (Veale et al. 2018). For this reason, we choose not to discard these most massive sys-tems from our analysis, since they were produced by self-consistent population synthesis models, in agreement with the measured GW stochastic background. Next, we explore how many of these binaries reach a 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8,which is the threshold we set for potentially being able to constrain their sky position and trigger a multi-messenger search (see Section 2.3). We find that of the 1,000 binary populations we generated, 3 and 38 would produce a binary that passes this cut in IPTA _20 and IPTA _25, respectively. The small number of binaries localisable in IPTA _20 is not surprising given the S/N thresholds we set; the difference in sensitivity between NG15 and IPTA _20 is limited and thus detecting a source with a well-constrained A90 in the third data release of IPTA is unlikely. Moreover, since the probability of resolving a binary in IPTA _20 is very small (less than one percent), we focus on IPTA _25 for the remaining analyses and consider it our fiducial PTA. In Figure 1, we show the sky positions of the potentially localisable binaries. As mentioned in Section 2.3, the size of each marker is proportional to the total mass of the system, while its color denotes the S/N in the IPTA _25 dataset. Unlike the detectable binaries above (with S/N ≥ 4), the distribution of these sources is highly anisotropic with about half of the binaries (20 out of 38) falling in a well-constrained region of the sky, with a right ascension between RA= 90 ◦

and RA= 225 ◦, and a declination between Dec= −45 ◦ and Dec= 0◦.This region has an area of approximately 5470 deg 2, corresponding to only ≈ 13 percent of the sky. This specific region is where the boost in sensitivity between NG15 and IPTA _25 is highest, most likely due to the addition of several pulsars in the southern hemisphere, e.g., from MPTA and PPTA. We further discuss this in Section 4.1. The main properties of the 38 binaries that could be spatially resolved in IPTA _25 are shown by the colored markers in Fig-ure 2, which are color-coded according to the S/N of their de-tection in our fiducial PTA configuration. The 25 −𝑡ℎ , 50 −𝑡ℎ , and 75 −𝑡ℎ percentiles of the distribution of their luminosity distance are log 10 (𝑑 lum /Mpc ) = 2.42 2.67 2.07 . The same percentiles for the dis-tribution of the total mass of these sources are log 10 (𝑀 tot /𝑀 ⊙ ) =

9.79 10 .01 9.61 . This means that the selected sources are marginally closer to Earth and more massive than the rest of the population. We con-clude that the first localisable binary will likely be relatively nearby (most binaries are roughly within 1Gpc, with the sole exclusion of 2 sources) and very massive (half of the sources have a mass equal or greater than 10 9.8 𝑀 ⊙ ). In addition, all of the potentially localisable sources are in the first six frequency bins, as is evident from the upper right panel of Figure 2. The resolvable binaries tend to have relatively high mass ratios, typically 𝑞 > 0.4, as shown in the lower panel. 

3.2 Binary parameters, localisation areas, and galaxy cross-matches 

For the 38 binaries which are potentially localisable with IPTA _25, we follow a more careful analysis. We simulate TOAs with the GW background from the respective population and inject one continuous-wave source, with properties as described above. Then we run the detection pipeline QuickCW to constrain the posterior distributions of their parameters. This allows us to constrain the lo-calisation area, which we then use to cross-match with the two galaxy catalogues. Of those, 30 have a size of A90 smaller than 2,000 deg 2

(≈ 5 percent of the total sky area), while the remaining 8 are poorly localised and therefore excluded from the rest of our analysis. This highlights that, even though we set a threshold of 𝑆 /𝑁 = 8 to select sources with well-constrained sky positions, not all injections return a 90 percent localisation area small enough to allow for an efficient host search. This is in line with findings from Petrov et al. (2024), where only 5 of the 9 binaries with 𝑆 /𝑁 = 8 have a constrained localisation area. Factors beyond the S/N, like the chirp mass of the binary and its position relative to the pulsars of the array (e.g., prox-imity to the best-timed pulsars or to those with well-known distances from Earth) play an important role in constraining the binary sky location (Petrov et al. 2024; Taylor 2026). The three quartiles of the distribution of the size of A90 for the well-localised binaries are 

A90 = 408 509 250 deg 2.We then calculate the overlap between the GW sky maps and the EM catalogues and quantify the coverage fraction 𝑓 cover . We find that A90 is entirely within the footprint of both EM catalogues ( 𝑓 cover = 1) for 8 of the 30 well-localised sources, while in one case we get 𝑓 cover = 1 for the AGN catalogue but not for ETGs. Therefore, in approximately two thirds of the cases, the GW localisation area is not fully covered by the EM surveys. This can significantly limit our ability to find the true host of PTA sources. On the other hand, there are no cases in which A90 is completely contained in a region of the sky with no support from the catalogues ( 𝑓 cover = 0), likely because the typical size of A90 constrained by our fiducial PTA configuration  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 10 N. Veronesi et al. 

is more extended than the gaps of the catalogues, e.g., the Galactic plane (see Section 3.3 for a discussion on the difference in A90 constrained by IPTA _25 and IPTA _30). The number of potential hosts reported below are not normalized based on 𝑓 cover , but we separately use the coverage factor to estimate the number of missing hosts in Section 3.4. This work focuses on providing realistic expectations regarding how many observed galaxies will have the possibility of being promptly followed-up in realistic host searches, and on ranking them. If the GW localisation area extends to sky regions not covered by existing surveys, this will motivate new observational campaigns, and the newly detected galaxies will be subsequently added to the list of potential hosts and ranked. Cross-matching the GW maps with the ETG and AGN catalogues we calculate the number of potential hosts. The three quartiles of the distribution of the number of ETGs within A90 for the 30 well-localised binaries are 𝑁 ETG = 189 , 286 312 ,231 95 ,290 , while for the AGN hosts they are 𝑁 AGN = 39 , 655 76 ,931 11 ,786 . The fact that these numbers are much larger than the ones obtained in Petrov et al. (2024), where the number of potential hosts within A90 are between 285 and 1,238 for the 5 localised binary detections with 𝑆 /𝑁 = 8, is explained by the much deeper catalogues used in this work, since the sizes of the localisation areas are not significantly different. The catalogue used in Petrov et al. (2024) contains a total of 43,532 entries. The number of potential hosts is directly linked to size of the localisation area. However, the other main binary parameters ( 𝑓 , ℎ0,and M) also determine our expectations about the binary hosts, since they are used to calculate the distances of the binaries using Equation 3, and the expected distributions of their EM properties, which in turn affect the ranking, the results of which are presented in Section 3.5. For this reason, we also quantify how well these properties are constrained by QuickCW . We find that the frequency and the strain of the 30 well-localised binaries are correctly constrained around the true value. In particular, we find that the percent error of the median of the posterior compared to the true injected value of the frequency and strain in log space is on average 0.1 and 0.7 percent, respectively. The interquartile range (between the first and the third quartile) of the posterior distribution in log space is on average 0.02 for the frequency and 0.20 for the strain. On the other hand, we find that the chirp mass is in general poorly constrained. The interquartile range of its posterior distribution in log space is on average 1.27. The fact that the PTA data cannot pro-vide tight constraints on the chirp mass has important implications in the search for the host galaxy. This well-known limitation (Sesana & Vecchio 2010; Charisi et al. 2024) is mainly caused by the fact that PTAs detect binaries early in their inspiral stage, where the frequency evolution is slow, and not during the chirping that happens right be-fore the merger, which is the most critical stage for constraining the mass of the binary and its luminosity distance. This poorly con-strained mass parameter is in turn, translated into poorly constrained distributions for 𝑑 lum , 𝑀 tot , and 𝑚 W1 ,AGN . In Veronesi et al. (2025b), we demonstrated that the uncertainty in the chirp mass contributes to 

≈ 98 percent of the uncertainty on the photometric properties of the host. Only the remaining ≈ 2 percent comes from uncertainties in the EM observables (e.g., the intrinsic scatter in the scaling relationship between the binary mass and the bulge mass of an ETG host, or the distribution of Eddington ratios for a given source mass in the case of an AGN). 

3.3 Constraints improvement with IPTA _30 

Next we explore how our results evolve with the addition of 42 mon-itored pulsars and 5 years of baseline with respect to our fiducial PTA configuration. With IPTA _30 we find a total of 507 binaries to be detectable and 141 to be localisable, while not being de-tectable by NG15. This finding suggests that in the next ten years we have a ≈ 50 percent probability of resolving the first binary, and a ≈ 15 percent chance of being able to potentially localise it within a sky region small enough to allow for host searches. These numbers likely represent lower limits for our expectations, since upcoming observatories like the Square Kilometre Array (SKA, Dewdney et al. 2009) or the Deep Synoptic Array (DSA, Hallinan et al. 2019) will increase the number of monitored pulsars faster than what we as-sume in this work. The quartiles of the total mass distribution in logarithmic space for the 141 potentially localisable binaries are 

log 10 (𝑀 tot /𝑀 ⊙ ) = 9.76 9.95 9.46 . The same values for the luminosity dis-tance are log 10 (𝑑 lum /Mpc ) = 2.57 2.92 2.18 , and 101 of them are in the first 5 frequency bins. These sources follow more closely the distri-butions of the full population compared to the potentially localisable binaries in IPTA _25, which are marginally more massive and nearby. Even though we still find some evidence for spatial clustering of the localisable binaries in the same region as in our fiducial con-figuration, the observed concentration in the southern hemisphere is weaker and the 141 selected sources are generally distributed all over the sky. This is to be expected, since with the increase in sensitiv-ity with respect to IPTA _25, the requirement of non-detectability in NG15 is less stringent. However, the main goal of the IPTA _30 simulations is to ex-plore how the posteriors evolve with the addition of new pulsars and the extension of the baselines for the 30 binaries that are already well-localised with our fiducial configuration. Therefore, we do not simulate the detection of all 141 potentially localisable binaries. Before presenting the results for the entire population, we show the evolution of the size of A90 and the number of potential hosts for one source. The binary we choose has a total mass of 𝑀 tot =

10 9.05 𝑀 ⊙ , a mass ratio of 𝑞 = 0.61 , a luminosity distance from Earth of 𝑑 lum = 37Mpc , a frequency of 𝑓 = 12nHz , and a S/N of 8.46 and 12.25 in IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively. This binary was chosen for its large value of 𝑓 cover , which is greater than 0.9 for both EM catalogues. The size of A90 is above average, resulting in a number of potential hosts on the higher end of the distribution, allowing us to demonstrate our method in a conservative scenario. In Figure 4, we show the sky position and localisation areas for the selected binary. In particular, we mark with a black cross the position of this binary, while the blue and orange dots are the positions of all the AGN within A90 as constrained by IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively, which practically delineate the respective A90s. As in Figure 1, the gray area marks the region of the sky with a Galactic latitude of |𝑏 | ≤ 10 ◦. The size of its localisation area decreases from ≈ 645 deg 2 in IPTA _25 to ≈ 349 deg 2 in IPTA _30, while the coverage factor with respect to the ETG and AGN catalogues increases from ≈ 91 percent and ≈ 96 percent, respectively, to full coverage 𝑓 cover = 1 in both catalogues. The number of potential ETG and AGN hosts decreases from a total of 424,830 and 97,562 to 263,477 and 62,203, respectively. The number of potential hosts decreases by ≈ 40 percent for both ETGs and AGN. This percentage is slightly smaller than the 46 percent decrease in localisation area. This is caused by the fact that 𝑓 cover is higher in IPTA _30. We discuss the issue of missing potential hosts in more detail in Section 3.4. Figure 4 demonstrates the reduction in the size of A90, but also highlights that in general the localisation area obtained with IPTA _30  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 11 −33.47 ∘

# 179.86 ∘

## IPTA_25 

## IPTA_30        

> Figure 4. localisation area at the 90 percent credibility level for the example binary (the true position is marked by the black cross), as constrained with
> IPTA _25 (blue) and IPTA _30 (orange). The localisation areas are delineated by the positions of the candidate AGN hosts from the R90 catalogue, since this binary has a high coverage factor ( 𝑓 cover ≈1) for both PTA configurations. The gray area denotes the region of the sky with a Galactic latitude of |𝑏 | ≤ 10 ◦.

is not necessarily contained within the one obtained with IPTA _25, but can slightly shift with respect to it. This means that the value of 

𝑓 cover for IPTA _30 cannot be predicted from the respective value in 

IPTA _25. This effect can also be seen in the second and third panels of Figure 5, where we examine the entire sample. More specifically, Figure 5 summarizes separately for each of the 30 well-localised binaries the evolution of the main results (locali-sation area, coverage fraction 𝑓 cover , and number of potential hosts both for ETGs and AGN) between the two IPTA configurations. We show the results obtained with the IPTA _25 configuration with round markers, and the ones obtained with IPTA _30 with squares. The colour of each marker denotes the S/N obtained with IPTA _25, and the sources are sorted horizontally as a function of their total mass, in ascending order. Among the 30 well-localised binaries, the average increase in S/N between IPTA _25 and IPTA _30 is approximately 32 percent. In the upper-left panel of Figure 6, we show the distributions of S/N for both configurations. In every panel of the figure we show both the counts per bin for the correspondent quantity, and its non-normalized cumulative distribution function (the values of which are reported on the right-hand side of the vertical axis). The solid blue lines show the results obtained with IPTA _25, while the dashed orange lines correspond to IPTA _30. The size of A90 constrained by IPTA _30 is on average ≈ 38 

percent smaller than the one constrained by IPTA _25. This is in line with the increase in S/N, since the localisation area is expected to be approximately inversely proportional to the square of S/N, i.e. A90 

∝ S/N−2 (Sesana & Vecchio 2010). Therefore, an increase in S/N of ≈ 30 percent is expected to cause a decrease of ≈ 40 percent in the size of A90. The quartiles of the distributions of A90 constrained with IPTA _30 for the 30 well-localised binaries are A90 = 212 325 140 

deg 2. The distribution of the size of A90 is shown both for IPTA _30 and for our fiducial configuration in the upper right panel in Figure 6. All 30 binaries that are well-localised in our fiducial configuration have a size of A90 smaller than 1,000 deg 2 in IPTA _30. We note that this is also true for the 8 binaries that, while having a 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8, had a size of A90 larger than 2,000 deg 2 in IPTA _25. It is also worth noting that for three binaries the constraints on the localisation area remain almost unchanged (see the upper panel of Figure 5), when adding the extra 42 pulsars and 5 years of monitoring, while for one case, they get worse. While it is not trivial to identify the exact cause of this, we hypothesize that this is likely due to the stochasticity involved in the generation of the TOAs (where we create random realizations of the pulsar noises, of the measurement white noise, and of the GW stochastic background), and more importantly in the MCMC sampling of the posterior distributions of the binary parameters. Regarding the coverage factor, we find that in 13 and 11 cases, A90 is entirely within the footprint of the ETG and AGN catalogue, respectively. These include all 9 that had this property in IPTA _25. However, there are 5 and 4 unfortunate cases, where the new localisa-tion area ends up being completely within the sky region not covered by the ETG and AGN catalogues, respectively. We cross-match the sky maps constrained by IPTA _30 with the ETG and AGN catalogues. The three quartiles of the distribution of the number of ETGs within A90 are 𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _30 ETG = 85 , 622 200 ,018 26 ,228 . The same values for the AGN scenario are 𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _30 AGN = 14 , 793 50 ,302 1,660 .These numbers also include the cases with 𝑓 cover = 0. We show the distributions of the number of potential hosts both for IPTA _25 and IPTA _30 in the lower left panel of Figure 6 (for ETGs) and in the lower right panel (for AGN). The presence of cases for which 

𝑓 cover = 0 (and thus there are zero cross-matched galaxies in A90) are marked by the fact that the cumulative distributions on the number of potential hosts for IPTA _30 start with a non-null value on the vertical axis. Next, we focus on the subset of PTA sources the localisation area of which is fully covered by EM surveys (i.e. 𝑓 cover = 1) in both IPTA _25 and IPTA _30 to see how the number of potential hosts evolves. This selection based on 𝑓 cover eliminates biases due to incomplete coverage. The number of hosts within A90 is decreased by 37.7 percent for ETGs and by 37.1 for AGN. This exactly follows the fractional decrease in the size of A90 for the same binaries ( ≈ 37 .8). Finally, with respect to the constraints of the remaining binary parameters in IPTA _30, we obtain an average interquartile range in logarithmic space for the frequency distribution of 0.01, for the strain distribution of 0.17, and for the chirp mass distribution of 1.10. As expected, the posterior distributions on these parameters get in general narrower when we add the extra 42 pulsars and 5 more years of observations, but the uncertainty on the chirp mass decreases on average only by a factor of ≈ 9 percent. Therefore, even in IPTA _30, the chirp mass uncertainty remains significant, and drives the uncertainty on the derived properties of the hosts. 

3.4 Missing galaxies 

The EM catalogues we use to cross-match the GW localisation areas are incomplete in sky regions with high contamination of stellar content and/or dust, e.g., close to the Galactic plane. For each well-localised binary, we estimate the number of potential hosts that are not present in our EM catalogues. We do so by first calculating the number of pixels in A90 that are not covered by EM surveys. Then we multiply this by the average number of galaxies per pixel, calculated by dividing the total number of entries in each catalogue by the number of pixels in the respective catalogue footprint. The distributions of the number of missing galaxies are shown in Figure 7. As before, the blue solid lines show the results obtained with our fiducial PTA configuration, while the orange dashed lines represent results obtained with IPTA _30. The quartiles of the distri-butions of missing ETG hosts, calculated including both cases with  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 12 N. Veronesi et al. 0

250 

500 

750 

1000 

> A90 [deg 2]

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

> fcover, ETG

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

> fcover, AGN

0

200 

400 

600 

> NETG, A90
> 1000

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

# Binary index 

0

50 

100 

150 

> NAGN, A90
> 1000

IPTA _25 

IPTA _30 

9 10 11 12 13 14 

# S/N 

Figure 5. Evolution of the main results between IPTA _25 (circles) and IPTA _30 (squares). The first panel shows the size of A90. The second and the third panels show the fraction of A90 that is in the footprint of the ETGs and the AGN catalogues, respectively. The last two panels show the number of potential hosts (ETGs and AGN) contained in A90. Each pair represents a separate well-localised simulated binary. In all the panels the simulated binaries are sorted on the horizontal axis in order of increasing total mass, color-coded by their S/N in IPTA _25 . 

𝑓 cover = 1 and with 𝑓 cover = 0, are 𝑁 ETG = 20 , 196 103 ,506 0 for IPTA _25 and 𝑁 ETG = 19 , 355 55 ,118 0 for IPTA _30. The same estimates for the AGN case are 𝑁 AGN = 6, 421 22 ,475 0 and 𝑁 AGN = 5, 946 15 ,102 0 . The null values of the 25 −𝑡ℎ percentiles are caused by the sources whose GW maps are fully covered by the EM catalogues ( 𝑓 cover = 1), and thus are associated to zero missing galaxies based on our definition 

> 6

. As can be seen in Figure 7, the variance of these values is large, as it depends both on the size of A90 and on the value of 𝑓 cover for each binary. The gaps in EM coverage highlighted by the large number of  

> 6

Some potential hosts might still be not present in the catalogues we use due to high level of obscuration or flux limits of the surveys the catalogues we use are obtained from. MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX) Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 13 8 10 12 14 16 18 

S/N 

0

5

10 

15 

> Counts

0 200 400 600 800 1000 

A90 [deg 2]

0

2

4

6

8

10 

> Counts

0 100 200 300 400 500 600 

NETG, A90 /1000 

0

2

4

6

8

10 

> Counts

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 

NAGN, A90 /1000 

0

5

10 

15 

> Counts

0

10 

20 

30 

> N(S/N<)

0

10 

20 

30 

> N(A90<)

0

10 

20 

30 

> N( NETG, A90 /1000<)

0

10 

20 

30 

> N( NAGN, A90 /1000<)

IPTA _25 IPTA _30    

> Figure 6. Distributions of the S/N (upper left panel), size of A90 (upper right panel), number of potential ETG hosts (lower left panel), and AGN hosts (lower right panel) for the 30 well-localised binaries. The solid lines correspond to IPTA _25, while the dashed ones to IPTA _30. For both configurations we show the counts per bin on the left-hand side of the vertical axis, and the non-normalized cumulative distribution function on its right-hand side.

missing galaxies can present a significant limitation in future searches for the host galaxy. The real host may coincide with one of the missing galaxies, making a multi-messenger detection impossible without follow-up observations to cover these gaps. This effect also needs to be accounted for both in the estimation of false-positive probabilities for the binary-host association, and in any potential ranking systems which associates to each candidate an absolute probability of being the true host. 

3.5 Host ranking 

Finally, for each galaxy within the localisation area we calculate the host score. We use this to derive the relative ranking of ETGs and AGN, independently for the two sets of galaxies. First, we identify galaxies that have 𝑝 𝑐𝑎𝑡 = 0 and thus can be excluded as potential hosts, since their EM properties are incon-sistent with the GW posteriors. On average, 47.21 percent of the ETGs are associated to a null score with IPTA _25, and this frac-tion is further increased to 61.14 percent with IPTA _30. The quar-tiles of the distribution of the number of remaining ETGs within A90 are 𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _25 ETG = 86 , 587 146 ,238 36 ,315 for IPTA _25 and 𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _30 ETG =

23 , 950 68 ,837 3,706 for IPTA _30. On the other hand, the fraction of AGN that can be excluded based on their EM properties is significantly lower, 0.26 percent and 3.76 percent for IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively. Thus the same quartiles for the remaining AGN are 

𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _25 AGN = 39 , 655 76 ,932 11 ,786 and 𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴 _30 AGN = 12 , 828 48 ,692 1,660 .The significant difference in our ability to exclude different types of hosts based on their EM properties is caused by the different information provided in the two employed catalogues. In particular, a null score for an ETG can be caused by a null value of 𝑝 Mtot or 

𝑝 dlum , caused by a high discrepancy between the estimates of the luminosity distance and, even more importantly, of the total mass obtained with the GW analysis and the respective values in the EM catalogue. For instance, in the ETG catalogue, a high fraction ( ≈83 percent) of the galaxies have an estimated SMBH mass smaller than 

10 8.5 𝑀 ⊙ , lower than any injected binary mass. For this illustrative example we choose 10 8.5 𝑀 ⊙ (even though the lowest simulated mass is higher than 10 9 𝑀 ⊙ ) because the posteriors on total mass are very wide, and we only get a null value of 𝑝 Mtot if the galaxy has an estimated value significantly incompatible from such distribution. In the AGN ranking, the information coming from the total mass and the luminosity distance is combined in the calculation of 𝑝 𝑚 W1 ,AGN ,which compares the apparent magnitudes of the hosts estimated from the GW analysis and those listed in the catalogue. This degeneracy, along with the poorly constrained chirp mass from the GW pipeline leads to very wide distributions of apparent magnitudes, resulting in a much lower fraction of null HAGN host scores. Hereafter, we show results of the host ranking obtained after all potential hosts with a null score are discarded. First, we demonstrate the results of the ranking method obtained using the same example source as in the previous section. Then we show how these results are generalized for the entire population of simulated and localised binaries. After excluding galaxies with a null score, the localisation area of this binary has a total of 206,543 ETGs with our fiducial configura-tion, which is reduced to 190,176 for IPTA _30, significantly lower than the initial number of ETGs within A90 (see Section 3.3). For our fiducial configuration, for example, this selection removes ap- 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 14 N. Veronesi et al. 0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> p(Nmissing ETGs  < )

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> pp (Nmissing AGN  < )

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 

Nmissing ETGs 

0

5

10 

15 

> Counts

IPTA _25 

IPTA _30 

0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 

Nmissing AGN 

0

5

10 

15 

> Counts

Figure 7. Distributions of the estimated number of potentially missing hosts due to the gaps in the EM catalogues. Blue solid lines show results obtained with IPTA _25, and orange dashed lines with IPTA _30. The upper panel shows the estimated number of missing ETGs, while the lower one the estimated number of missing AGN. 

proximately 51 percent of the galaxies in A90. The remaining AGN within A90 are 90,132 for IPTA _25 and 62,203 for IPTA _30, only slightly lower than the initial total number. Figure 8 shows the cu-mulative distribution functions of the non-null host scores for the example binary. The vertical lines highlight the medians and the 95 −𝑡ℎ percentiles of the distributions. The efficiency parameter (i.e. the ratio between the score of the top performing galaxies and the average galaxies) for ETGs is E95 −50 = 14 .44 , while for the AGN scenario goes down to E95 −50 = 5.26 . For IPTA _30, we see an im-provement for ETGs, with an efficiency parameter E95 −50 = 17 .33 ,but this improvement does not extend to AGN, for which the ef-ficiency parameter is E95 −50 = 4.98 . We remind the reader that a higher value of this ratio indicates that the top galaxies differ more from the lowest ranked and thus we may need to follow-up fewer of these potential hosts to find the true one. However, since the calcu-lated scores do not correspond to an absolute probability of a galaxy being the binary host, we cannot estimate how many potential hosts have to be followed up to reach a certain likelihood for finding the host. The aforementioned differences that allow us to exclude more ETGs compared to AGN can also explain the higher efficiency in the ranking of the two types of galaxies. We further discuss this in Section 4. The difference in the ranking efficiency between the two galaxy types is consistently seen in the entire sample of well-localised PTA sources. We then calculate the ratio E95 −50 for all the cases with 

𝑓 cover > 0, and show its distribution for ETGs (upper panel) and for AGN (lower panel) in Figure 9. In the ETG scenario the quartiles of the distribution of the efficiency parameter are EETG 95 −50 = 12 .41 14 .11 10 .06 

for our fiducial PTA configuration and EETG 95 −50 = 17 .20 21 .06 13 .65 for 10 7 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2

> ETG

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> p( ETG  < )

IPTA _25 

IPTA _30 

10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2

> AGN

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> p( AGN  < )

Figure 8. Cumulative distribution functions of the non-null host scores for the ETGs (upper panel) and AGN (lower panel) contained in A90 for the source used as an example in Section 3.3, the position of which is shown in Figure 4. Blue solid (orange dashed) lines indicate the distributions for 

IPTA _25 ( IPTA _30). 0           

> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> N( ETG 95  50  < )
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> N( AGN 95  50  < )
> 0510 15 20 25
> ETG 95 50
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Counts
> IPTA _25
> IPTA _30
> 02468
> AGN 95 50
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> Counts

Figure 9. Distribution functions of the ranking efficiency E95 −50 (i.e. the ratio between the 95-th and the 50-th percentiles of the non-null host score distributions) for the well-locsalized binaries with 𝑓 cover > 0. The plot on the top shows the results of the cross-matches between GW sky maps and the ETG catalogue, while the lower the results obtained from the cross-matches with the AGN catalogue. The blue solid line shows the results of fiducial PTA configuration, while the orange dashed lines the ones of IPTA _30. MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX) Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 15 

IPTA _30. For AGN the same values are EAGN 95 −50 = 3.65 4.42 3.20 and 

EAGN 95 −50 = 4.36 5.81 3.51 . We note that for both types of potential hosts the ranking efficiency is improved (albeit marginally for AGN) due to better constraints on the binary parameters (especially the mass) obtained with IPTA _30. This is encouraging, especially since the starting number of galaxies is already smaller due to better localisa-tion. This is further discussed in Section 4. 

4 DISCUSSION 

In this section we discuss the implications of our findings and high-light assumptions and caveats of the method we employ. We also present some alternative approaches that might be explored in future studies. 

4.1 Prospects for binary detectability in the near future 

We generate 1,000 binary populations, consistent with the GW back-ground measured in NG15 and select the loudest binaries requiring that there was no evidence for their presence in NG15 (see Section 2.3). We find that a significant fraction of the populations ( ≈40 per-cent) could produce a detectable binary in the next 5 years. This fraction increases to over 50 percent in IPTA _30. However, when imposing the additional requirement of 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8 to be able to lo-calise the source, only 3.8 percent of the populations pass this cut in 

IPTA _25. When simulating their GW signals and running the detec-tion analysis, this fraction is lowered to 3 percent, given that some sources have an A90 greater than 2,000 deg 2 .Even though this may appear like a pessimistic prediction for the prospects of multi-messenger discoveries in the near-future, it is not entirely surprising. By the nature of the experiment, the S/N of individual binaries, and thus our ability to constrain their sky location, will increase gradually. Therefore, the most likely scenario is that PTAs will first find evidence for the presence of a continuous wave source in their data, and constrain its frequency and strain, but will not be able to pinpoint its location initially (Petrov et al. 2025). However, with the addition of more pulsars and the extension of baselines we will be able to localise the source with improving precision as more and more data are collected. For instance, we see a ≈ 40 percent decrease in the size of A90 between IPTA _25 and IPTA _30. We also note that in this configuration, the loudest binary is potentially localisable in approximately 15 percent of the realizations. We also see that the predicted population of resolvable binaries in 

IPTA _25 is clustered in the sky. This is clearly evident in Figure 1. This interesting finding suggests that an upcoming detection would have a high probability of arising from a specific region in the sky, more specifically the southern hemisphere. This clustering is caused by our requirement that such a source was not detectable by NG15. As mentioned above, this region experiences a greater boost in sensi-tivity compared to NG15, because in IPTA _25 we include pulsars in the southern hemisphere from MPTA and PPTA. The same clustering is present, but much weaker, in the binaries potentially localisable with IPTA _30. Since we have not imposed the non-detectability selection using only the third data release of PPTA or the first data release of MPTA, we cannot conclude whether our prediction regarding the observed clustering is robust. However, it is safe to assume that had we imposed the same criterion for the EPTA dataset, we would observe a similar trend, since there is significant overlap between the NANOGrav and EPTA pulsars. We note, however, that the PPTA dataset includes fewer pulsars, while the MPTA data have shorter baselines and thus may have less constraining power. Therefore, it is possible that even if we performed similar cuts on their detectability based on PPTA or MPTA, the remaining sources could still end up mostly in the southern hemisphere (even though some of the 38 sources would be excluded). We emphasize that the main goal of the paper is not to predict the exact properties of the first resolvable binary, but rather to quantify their localisability and the number of viable host galaxies. A future study, one specifically aimed to predict the parameters of the first source that will be detected above the background, should impose as criterion that these sources were not detected by any given PTA. It should also be constrained by the findings of the search in the upcoming third data release of IPTA. However, if this clustering feature persists, we need to consider the limitations imposed by the overlap of this region with the Galactic plane, where the search for binary hosts is heavily limited by gaps in the coverage of EM surveys. Even so, we find encouraging that the localisation area of more than 25 percent of the well-localised binaries is fully covered by both catalogues (see Figure 5). Finally, we note that in some simulated SMBH binary populations more than one binary is considered either detectable or even poten-tially localisable according to our selection criteria. Since the focus of this work is to quantify the number of potential hosts of the first resolved PTA source and then rank them, for each binary population we select only the top binary (in terms of S/N) to simulate its TOAs and perform a detection analysis. However, since a number of them have one or more "loud siblings", we highlight the need to further implement detection pipelines that simultaneously search for multi-ple binaries on top of the stochastic background (Petiteau et al. 2013; Curyło et al. 2026). 

4.2 localisation areas and cross-matches 

We perform realistic simulations of continuous-wave sources on top of the GW background and constrain their parameters with a stan-dard GW detection pipeline. We find the median of A90 for the 30 sources localised by IPTA _25 to be A90 = 408 deg 2, reduced to 

A90 = 212 deg 2 in IPTA _30, as can be seen from the upper right panel of Figure 6. Even though the localisation area decreases by 

≈ 40 percent on average, it remains large even in the extended PTA configuration. We note that the poor localisation is typical for GW experiments across the entire spectrum. These constraints on A90 are consistent with findings in previous studies (e.g., Goldstein et al. 2019 Petrov et al. 2024, Gardiner et al. 2025, and Truant et al. 2026), and inevitably lead to a large number of candidate hosts, i.e. hundreds of thousands of ETGs and tens of thousands of AGN. Specifically, for the 30 well-localised binaries the median number is 189,286 for ETGs and 39,655 for AGN. These numbers, which are different with respect to the ones listed in previous studies (e.g., Goldstein et al. 2019; Petrov et al. 2024), derive from the choice of all-sky surveys we use for the cross-match. The NANOGrav catalogue presented in (Arzoumanian et al. 2021) and used in Petrov et al. (2024), for example, contains a total of 43,532 galaxies within 500 Mpc from Earth. The catalogue of ETGs we use has a factor of approximately 450 more entries. While not complete over the entire sky, the EM catalogues we adopt have a remarkable depth and uniformity outside the Galactic plane, and therefore reflect a realistic scenario for future multi-messenger searches. The main dif-ference in the galaxy catalogue used to test the host ranking method first presented in Goldstein et al. (2019) is that we use observed ob-jects, while in the aforementioned work the candidates are extracted  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 16 N. Veronesi et al. 

from the Millennium Run cosmological simulation (Springel et al. 2005), and have a stellar mass which is known a priori and is not derived from observed magnitudes. The remarkable number of candidate hosts within every locali-sation area, even after having discarded the ones with a null host score, highlights the need for an accurate estimation of the false-positive probability for any future search for an EM counterpart. The source-host association will rely on a specific EM signature (or a combination of many), and its false-positive probability will depend on several factors, including the involved observables, and the quality of the available EM data. Many of the proposed binary signatures in AGN (e.g., periodic variability or broad line Doppler shifts) can be confused with the typical AGN behavior (Vaughan et al. 2016; Kr-ishnan et al. 2021; D’Orazio & Charisi 2023). In Davis et al. (2024), for example, is shown that the most luminous single quasars can efficiently produce binary-like signatures in simulated light-curves of the Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST, Ivezić et al. 2019), and this can lead to false-positive rates as high as 60 percent for such objects. Similar issues may arise for ETG hosts, which might contain a PTA source without exhibiting any distinct observable EM property. For instance, the presence of a binary can be revealed by detailed observations of morphological and kinematic properties of the galaxies (Bardati et al. 2024), while in typical im-ages of average quality they may look indistinguishable from the rest of the ETGs. The information coming from any of these observables can be introduced in the 𝑝 cat term of the host score, making the rank-ing system more efficient, further reducing the number of potential hosts to follow up. We also note that the localisation areas and the resulting cross-matches with the EM catalogues are obtained using sky maps with the resolution of a Healpix map with NSide=32. This choice, which likely has negligible impact on our main results, was made to avoid holes in the GW maps (i.e. pixels excluded from A90, while fully surrounded by pixels that were included) caused by a limited amount of posterior samples. Increasing the resolution to NSide=64 would lead to localisation areas without a compact shape in several cases. This feature is also present in some A90 calculated with NSide=32, but negligibly, so it does not affect the cross-matches or the ranking. Future studies could use longer MCMCs and opt for a higher value of NSide, with the increased resolution likely resulting in slightly smaller A90s. Finally, the precision of PTA sources localisation, together with the one of the chirp mass constraints, could be greatly improved by fully leveraging the information contained in the pulsar term of the GW signal, which would be possible with accurate pulsar distances measurements to use as priors, and detection pipelines that don’t consider the phase of such term as nuisance parameter, but rather derive it from the inferred pulsar distances themselves (Taylor 2026). This is particularly true for systems with high masses and low luminosity distance, which are loud enough to be soon detected by PTAs and have an orbital evolution which happens on shorter timescales with respect to the rest of the population (see, e.g., McGrath et al. 2022; Deng & Finn 2011). This works therefore highlights the importance of better pulsar distances constraints and of the development of efficient "phase-linked" pipelines for the future of multi-messenger analyses of PTA sources. 

4.3 Efficiency of host ranking 

The method we develop allows us to rank the candidate hosts based on their sky position and their EM properties. Using additional informa-tion on top of their sky positions can facilitate future multi-messenger searches for the host galaxy of the PTA source. In fact, we can ex-clude approximately half of the ETGs within A90 (the ones with null scores) based only on their photometric properties. Figure 9 shows that the top performing ETGs in our ranking can be tens of times more likely to contain the PTA source than the typical galaxies within A90. In the ETG case, the total mass, 𝑀 tot ,and the luminosity distance, 𝑑 lum , enter separately the calculation of 

HETG (see Equation 15), thus providing more constraining power. In contrast, the best performing AGN have a score approximately 4 times higher than the median. This is approximately the ratio we would obtain considering only the sky positions; the additional constraints from the apparent W1 magnitude do not significantly improve the ranking. This is because 𝑚 W1 ,AGN is an observable which combines the total mass of the binary and its luminosity distance from Earth (which are not listed in the AGN cataloguee we adopt), resulting in very broad posteriors. Incorporating other sources of uncertainty (e.g., the Eddington fraction, the bolometric correction) makes this property even less constraining. Our inability to efficiently rank AGN may not be a huge limitation, since previous studies suggested that detectable AGN are less likely to host PTA sources, compared to quiescent massive galaxies (Truant et al. 2026). However, in this work we conduct the whole analysis for both types of hosts in parallel for completeness. Based on the above, we conclude that the ranking method can be boosted with a few improvements in the EM catalogues. For instance, building an AGN catalogue that provides estimates of the redshift and the mass of the central SMBH for each galaxy would result in a ranking efficiency similar to the ETG case. At the same time, the ranking efficiency for ETGs could be further improved if the catalogue provided the galaxy morphological type. We note that the ETG catalogue excludes only AGN and contains all types of quiescent galaxies. We made an implicit assumption that all of those are ETGs, by assigning the entirety of the stellar mass to the bulge when calculating the mass of the central SMBH (see Section 2.5.1). This assumption does not hold for spiral galaxies, in which only a fraction of the stellar component is in the bulge. Late type galaxies are present in the catalogue, although they are typically on the lower end of the stellar mass distribution, and the majority may have been excluded as potential hosts with null scores. However, it is possible that some remain even after this cut, and thus our estimates on the total number of potential hosts can be considered as upper limits. Practically, a smaller bulge mass would translate into a smaller SMBH mass, and could be more likely rejected as a potential host due to the incompatibility with the (typically high) total binary mass estimates obtained from the GW analysis. We emphasize that the main limiting factor comes from the GW analysis and the wide posteriors of the chirp mass (Veronesi et al. 2025b). Even though these posteriors improve in IPTA _30, they re-main wide. This large uncertainty propagates to the derived posteriors of total mass, luminosity distance, and W1 apparent magnitude (for the AGN case). As a result, in some cases the sky position almost ex-clusively determines the ranking. However, as we have already seen, for a significant fraction of candidate hosts, including the information encoded in 𝑝 cat is crucial, since it can reject a considerable fraction of galaxies and contribute to the relative ranking of the remaining candidates. Finally, as mentioned in Section 2.6, the host scores defined by Equations 15 and 16 only provide the relative ranking of the hosts, and not the absolute probability that a certain candidate contains the GW-detected source. In order to estimate such a probability, one would need to take into account the normalization of the various probability densities in the score, the total probability density asso- 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources 17 

ciated with the part of GW sky map that falls in the gaps of the EM catalogues, and the completeness of the latter. The completeness can be estimated as a function of luminosity and redshift by comparing the number density of observed galaxies with the estimates from luminosity functions (see, e.g. Veronesi et al. 2025a). This is non-trivial and thus the calculation of an absolute probability for each potential host is beyond the scope of this work, and will be presented in a follow-up publication (Petrov et al. tion). 

5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

In this work, we perform realistic simulations to predict the properties of the first PTA source that can be resolved on top of the GW back-ground in the near future. We focus on sources that can be localised with sufficient accuracy to allow for multi-messenger searches. We cross-match the GW maps with EM catalogues to estimate the num-ber of potential hosts, exclude galaxies based on their EM properties, and rank the remaining. Specifically, we generate 1,000 realistic SMBH binary populations that are compatible with the measured stochastic GW background in NG15 using semi-analytical models from holodeck . We select the loudest binary for each population and simulate their TOAs on top of the observed background in realistic PTA configurations that resemble our expectations for upcoming IPTA datasets. In particular, we consider three PTAs: IPTA _20, IPTA _25, and IPTA _30, with baselines of 20, 25 and 30 years, containing a total of 116, 158 and 200 pulsars, respectively. We then use QuickCW , one of the standard GW detection pipelines, to constrain the main properties of the injected binaries. We cross-match the resulting sky maps with two all-sky catalogues of ETGs and AGN, which are expected to be complete for the massive hosts of PTA sources. We estimate the number of potential hosts for each type of galaxy independently and, for the first time, quantify the impact of incomplete EM coverage by estimating the number of missing hosts. We convert the GW posteriors of binary parameters into EM observables that match the available information in each galaxy catalogue. We then use this information to discard potential hosts that are completely incompatible with the expectations coming from the GW analyses. We rank the remaining galaxies based on the probability of containing the PTA source. To do so, we develop a ranking system that takes into account both the photometric and the astrometric properties of each ETG and AGN. Our main conclusions can be summarized as follows: 

• A total of 212 and 378 populations have a detectable binary (𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 4) in IPTA _20 and IPTA _25, respectively. This number is increased to 507 in IPTA _30. Our estimated probability to resolve one of these detectable sources in the next ten years is therefore ap-proximately 50 percent. These detectable sources are isotropically distributed in the sky with their main parameters (total mass, mass ratio, luminosity distance from Earth) following the underlying pop-ulation of loudest binaries from each simulated population. Approxi-mately 70 percent of the detectable binaries have a frequency 𝑓 ≲ 10 

nHz. 

• A total of 3, 38, and 141 binary populations have a binary that reaches 𝑆 /𝑁 ≥ 8 and is potentially localisable by IPTA _20, IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively. Similarly to the detectable binaries, these sources typically have low frequencies. They also have lower lumi-nosity distances from Earth and higher total masses with respect to the rest of the population. For IPTA _25 (our fiducial configuration), most of these localisable sources are clustered in the area with 90 ◦ <

RA < 225 ◦ and −45 ◦ < Dec < 0◦. An over-density in the same sky region is also observed in IPTA _30, but the clustering is weaker. 

• For our fiducial configuration, 30 binaries have a localisa-tion area smaller than A90 = 2,000 deg 2, and are considered well-localised. Their typical size of A90 spans hundreds of square degrees with a median of A90 = 408 deg 2, containing hundreds of thousands of ETGs and tens of thousands of AGN. The median number of potential hosts within A90 is ≈190,000 for ETGs and ≈40,000 for AGN. The size of A90 and, in turn, the number of potential hosts is approximately 40 percent smaller in IPTA _30. 

• In our fiducial PTA configuration 22 (21) of the 30 well-localised binaries have an A90 partially outside of the footprint of the ETG (AGN) catalogue. In IPTA _30 this slightly decreases with 13 for ETGs and 11 for the AGN case having total coverage, while we also find cases (5 for ETGs and 4 for AGN) in which A90 is completely outside of the footprint of the surveys. Incomplete EM coverage implies that the true binary host might not be present in the EM catalogues. The median of the number of potentially miss-ing hosts is ≈20,000 for ETGs and ≈6,000 for AGN in our fiducial configuration, and only slightly decreases in IPTA _30 ( ≈19,500 and 

≈6,000). 

• Our ranking method assigns a null score on average to approx-imately 47 and 61 percent of the ETGs for IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively. These are galaxies with an estimated luminosity dis-tance or central SMBH binary mass incompatible with the estimates obtained from the GW analysis. The selection based on the apparent W1 magnitude for AGN can reject only approximately 0.3 and 4 percent of the potential hosts in IPTA _25 and IPTA _30, respectively. 

• With our fiducial configuration, among the non-rejected hosts, the top performing ETGs (AGN) have a score which is ≈ 12 .4 (≈ 3.7)times higher than the average candidate. A marginally higher ranking efficiency is achieved with IPTA _30, where the respective median values are ≈ 17 .2 (≈ 4.4). The lower ranking efficiency for AGN is due to the use of apparent magnitudes instead of separately using the total SMBH mass and the luminosity distance, like for ETGs. Thanks to the always improving PTA sensitivity, the first resolved source has a non-negligible chance to be detected in the next 10 years. Once the binary is localised, a ranking system like the one proposed in this work will be an essential starting point for the bi-nary host search. Our method identifies which galaxies are the most promising and thus worth prioritizing in searches for EM binary sig-natures. This work also highlights the need for EM catalogues with sky coverages as complete as possible. The comparison of results between the two catalogues shows that having estimates of the total mass of the SMBH as well as of their redshift can boost the ranking efficiency and exclude more candidate hosts. Therefore, building an AGN catalogue with these quantities is important. Our chances of discovering the first multi-messenger SMBH binary greatly depend on both the sensitivity of PTAs and the completeness and uniformity of the available EM data. Since a perfectly complete census of ETGs and AGN is impossible to obtain in the foreseeable future, a detailed estimation of the catalogues’ completeness (as a function of luminos-ity, redshift, and sky position) will be crucial for correctly estimating the false-positive probability of any future host-binary association. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors thank Emiko Gardiner and Bence Bécsy for their help and support with the creation of binary populations and the trouble-shooting with the MCMCs algorithms. MC acknowledges support by the European Union (ERC, MMMonsters, 101117624). This research  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)

# 18 N. Veronesi et al. 

used resources of the Center for Institutional Research Computing at Washington State University. SRT is a member of the NANOGrav collaboration, which receives support from NSF Physics Frontiers Center award number 1430284 and 2020265. SRT acknowledges support from an NSF CAREER #2146016, NSF AST-2307719, NSF NRT-2125764, and NASA LPS-80NSSC26K0342. SRT also ac-knowledges support from a Chancellor’s Faculty Fellowship from Vanderbilt University. DJD acknowledges support from Sapere Aude Starting grant No. 121587 through the Danish Independent Research Fund. Softwares : Numpy (Harris et al. 2020); Matplotlib (Hunter 2007); SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020); Astropy (Astropy Collabora-tion et al. 2018); Healpy (Zonca et al. 2019); Enterprise (Ellis et al. 2020); QuicCW (Bécsy et al. 2022a). 

REFERENCES 

Agazie G., et al., 2023a, ApJ, 951, L8 Agazie G., et al., 2023b, ApJ, 951, L9 Agazie G., et al Nanograv Collaboration 2023c, ApJ, 952, L37 Agazie G., et al., 2024, ApJ, 966, 105 Agazie G., et al., 2025, ApJ, 978, 31 Arzoumanian Z., et al., 2021, ApJ, 914, 121 Assef R. J., Stern D., Noirot G., Jun H. D., Cutri R. M., Eisenhardt P. R. M., 2018, ApJS, 234, 23 Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 123 Bardati J., Ruan J. J., Haggard D., Tremmel M., 2024, ApJ, 961, 34 Bécsy B., Cornish N. J., Digman M. C., 2022a, Phys. Rev. D, 105, 122003 Bécsy B., Cornish N. J., Kelley L. Z., 2022b, ApJ, 941, 119 Begelman M. C., Blandford R. D., Rees M. J., 1980, Nature, 287, 307 Bilicki M., Jarrett T. H., Peacock J. A., Cluver M. E., Steward L., 2014, ApJS, 210, 9 Bilicki M., et al., 2016, ApJS, 225, 5 Bluck A. F. L., Mendel J. T., Ellison S. L., Moreno J., Simard L., Patton D. R., Starkenburg E., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 599 Cardelli J. A., Clayton G. C., Mathis J. S., 1989, ApJ, 345, 245 Charisi M., Taylor S. R., Witt C. A., Runnoe J., 2024, Phys. Rev. Lett., 132, 061401 Charisi M., Taylor S. R., Runnoe J., Witt C., Petrov P., 2026, MNRAS, Chiang Y.-K., 2023, ApJ, 958, 118 Cluver M. E., et al., 2014, ApJ, 782, 90 Curyło M., Thrane E., Lasky P. D., Gaynor D. S., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2604.19073 Cutri R. M., et al., 2003, 2MASS All Sky Catalog of point sources. D’Orazio D. J., Charisi M., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2310.16896 Davis M. C., et al., 2024, ApJ, 965, 34 Deng X., Finn L. S., 2011, MNRAS, 414, 50 Dewdney P. E., Hall P. J., Schilizzi R. T., Lazio T. J. L. W., 2009, IEEE Proceedings, 97, 1482 EPTA Collaboration et al., 2023, A&A, 678, A50 Ellis J. A., Vallisneri M., Taylor S. R., Baker P. T., 2020, ENTERPRISE: En-hanced Numerical Toolbox Enabling a Robust PulsaR Inference SuitE, Zenodo, doi:10.5281/zenodo.4059815, https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.4059815 

Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, ApJ, 539, L9 Gardiner E. C., Kelley L. Z., Lemke A.-M., Mitridate A., 2024, ApJ, 965, 164 Gardiner E. C., Bécsy B., Kelley L. Z., Cornish N. J., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2502.16016 Goicovic F. G., Sesana A., Cuadra J., Stasyszyn F., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 514 Goldstein J. M., Veitch J., Sesana A., Vecchio A., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 5447 Goldstein J. M., Sesana A., Holgado A. M., Veitch J., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 248 Hallinan G., et al., 2019, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society. p. 255 ( arXiv:1907.07648 ), doi:10.48550/arXiv.1907.07648 Hambly N. C., et al., 2001, MNRAS, 326, 1279 Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357 Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90 Ivezić Ž., et al., 2019, ApJ, 873, 111 Kauffmann G., et al., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 1055 Kelley L. Z., Blecha L., Hernquist L., Sesana A., Taylor S. R., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 964 Kelley L., et al., 2019, BAAS, 51, 490 Krishnan S., Markowitz A. G., Schwarzenberg-Czerny A., Middleton M. J., 2021, MNRAS, 508, 3975 Laal N., Taylor S. R., Matt C., Gultekin K., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2512.11981 Lang P., et al., 2014, ApJ, 788, 11 Lyke B. W., et al., 2020, ApJS, 250, 8 Ma C.-P., Greene J. E., McConnell N., Janish R., Blakeslee J. P., Thomas J., Murphy J. D., 2014, ApJ, 795, 158 McConnell N. J., Ma C.-P., 2013, ApJ, 764, 184 McGrath C., D’Orazio D. J., Creighton J., 2022, MNRAS, 517, 1242 Miles M. T., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 3976 Miles M. T., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 536, 1489 Mingarelli C. M. F., et al., 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 886 Petiteau A., Babak S., Sesana A., de Araújo M., 2013, Phys. Rev. D, 87, 064036 Petrov P., Taylor S. R., Charisi M., Ma C.-P., 2024, ApJ, 976, 129 Petrov P., Schult L., Taylor S. R., Pol N., Laal N., Charisi M., Ma C.-P., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2510.01316 Petrov et al., In preparation, In preparation Pilawa J., et al., In preparation, In preparation Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6 Reardon D. J., et al., 2023, ApJ, 951, L6 Rosado P. A., Sesana A., Gair J., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2417 Runnoe J. C., Brotherton M. S., Shang Z., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 478 Sato-Polito G., Zaldarriaga M., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2509.08041 Sesana A., 2015, in Sopuerta C. F., ed., Astrophysics and Space Sci-ence Proceedings Vol. 40, Gravitational Wave Astrophysics. p. 147 (arXiv:1407.5693 ), doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10488-1_13 Sesana A., Vecchio A., 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 81, 104008 Shang Z., et al., 2011, ApJS, 196, 2 Springel V., et al., 2005, Nature, 435, 629 Taylor S. R., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2603.10120 Taylor S. R., Huerta E. A., Gair J. R., McWilliams S. T., 2016, ApJ, 817, 70 Truant R. J., Izquierdo-Villalba D., Sesana A., Shaifullah G. M., Bonetti M., 2025, A&A, 694, A282 Truant R. J., Izquierdo-Villalba D., Sesana A., Mohiuddin Shaifullah G., Bonetti M., Spinoso D., Bonoli S., 2026, A&A, 706, A115 Turski C., Bilicki M., Dálya G., Gray R., Ghosh A., 2023, MNRAS, 526, 6224 Vaughan S., Uttley P., Markowitz A. G., Huppenkothen D., Middleton M. J., Alston W. N., Scargle J. D., Farr W. M., 2016, MNRAS, 461, 3145 Veale M., Ma C.-P., Greene J. E., Thomas J., Blakeslee J. P., Walsh J. L., Ito J., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 5446 Veronesi N., van Velzen S., Rossi E. M., Storey-Fisher K., 2025a, MNRAS, 536, 375 Veronesi N., Charisi M., Taylor S. R., Runnoe J., D’Orazio D. J., 2025b, ApJ, 990, 46 Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261 Wright E. L., et al., 2010, AJ, 140, 1868 Wu Q., Shen Y., 2022, ApJS, 263, 42 Xu H., et al., 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 075024 Zic A., et al., 2023, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 40, e049 Zonca A., Singer L., Lenz D., Reinecke M., Rosset C., Hivon E., Gorski K., 2019, Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1298 This paper has been typeset from a TEX/L ATEX file prepared by the author. MNRAS 000 , 1–18 (XXXX)