Title: Multimodal Transformer Based Generic Mixture Density Network for Scattering Timescale Estimation of Fast Radio Bursts

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03596v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:09:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
Draft version June 3, 2026 

Typeset using L ATEX preprint style in AASTeX7.0.1 

Multimodal Transformer Based Generic Mixture Density Network for Scattering Timescale Estimation of Fast Radio Bursts 

Bikash Kharel ,1, 2 Emmanuel Fonseca ,1, 2 Srinjoy Das ,3 Mason Ng ,4, 5 

Paul Scholz ,6 Mawson W. Sammons ,7 Lordrick Kahinga ,8, 9 and Afrokk Khan 4, 5 

> 1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, PO Box 6315, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA 

> 2

Center for Gravitational Waves and Cosmology, West Virginia University, Chestnut Ridge Research Building, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA 

> 3

School of Mathematical and Data Sciences, West Virginia University, PO Box 6310, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA 

> 4

Department of Physics, McGill University, 3600 rue University, Montr´ eal, QC H3A 2T8, Canada 

> 5

Trottier Space Institute, McGill University, 3550 rue University, Montr´ eal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada 

> 6

Department of Physics and Astronomy, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON MJ3 1P3, Canada 

> 7

Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille, Aix-Marseille Univ., CNRS, CNES, Marseille, France 

> 8

Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95060, USA 

> 9

Department of Physics, College of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, University of Dodoma, 1 Benjamin Mkapa Road, 41218 Iyumbu, Dodoma 259, Tanzania 

ABSTRACT The discovery rate of fast radio bursts (FRBs) continues to increase with the advent of new radio facilities and yet extracting their astrophysical parameters such as scatter-ing timescale ( τ ) remains a significant bottleneck. Current τ measurement approaches like fitting analytic template models and scattering aware de-convolution are accurate but slow, sensitive to initialization, limited by low signal to noise and often require manual supervision. These limitations inspired us to explore fast, robust and scalable machine learning methods to estimate the astrophysical parameter value. We present a deep learning approach named Multimodal Transformer Based Generic Mixture Den-sity Network (MT-GMDN) which ingests FRB dynamic spectrum and its corresponding timeseries profile through parallel transformer encoders, fuses their latent representa-tions and predicts the distribution of τ with probabilistic output derived from generic mixture-density formulation. This formulation not only estimates the value of τ but also captures the (zero inflated) nature of FRB populations where a significant fraction of bursts exhibit unresolvable scattering. We trained MT-GMDN on ∼ 3500 FRBs from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 while holding out some fraction of FRBs for validation during training and for testing after the training completes. The model achieves a coefficient of determination ( R2) value of 94% on the expected value of τ for the events with measurable scattering with an excellent recall value of 90% on the test data set. The 

Corresponding author: Bikash Kharel bk0055@mix.wvu.edu 

> arXiv:2606.03596v1 [astro-ph.HE] 2 Jun 2026

2 B. Kharel et al. 

model was also able to incorporate heteroskedastic errors enabling us the construction of a confidence interval for the predictions. 

Keywords: Fast radio bursts — Interstellar scattering — Neural networks — Trans-formers — Mixture density  

> 1.

INTRODUCTION Fast radio bursts (FRBs) are powerful extragalactic astronomical transients of millisecond durations (D. R. Lorimer et al. 2007) and their observed morphology is strongly determined by propagation effects through ionized interstellar and intergalactic media (e.g., J. M. Cordes & M. A. McLaughlin 2003). One of the key propagation signatures is a frequency dependent pulse dispersion and temporal broadening due to the multi-path scattering of the radio signal which is often modeled as a one-sided exponential tail with characteristic scattering timescale ( τ ) (I. P. Williamson 1974). Figure 1 displays two simulated FRBs. The first (left) shows a sharp Gaussian peak with no scattering while the second (right) exhibits an exponentially decaying tail demonstrating scattering. Electromagnetic radiation from an FRB source traveling through a turbulent interstellar medium (ISM) with inhomogeneous electron density distribution experiences a frequency dependent phase shift. The “thin screen” model formulates the observed intensity of the scattered radiation as a result of the phase shift to be an impulse response function (IRF) of the form (D. R. Lorimer & M. Kramer 2004): 

h(t) ∝ exp 



−∆tτ



, (1) where, 

• ∆t : Time delay between scattered and non-scattered rays and   

> Figure 1. Simulated FRB dynamic spectra with corresponding timeseries at the top of respective dynamic spectrum. The left panel shows an FRB without scattering characterized by a symmetric Gaussian pulse profile, while the right panel shows a scattered FRB with asymmetric pulse profile characterized by expo-nentially decaying tail.

Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 3

• τ : Characteristic scattering timescale of the ISM. This scattering timescale exhibits frequency dependence as τ ∝ f −4

The resulting observed pulse profile of an FRB signal is thus the convolution of its intrinsic profile with the scattering exponential kernel, i.e., 

Iobs (t) = Iint (t) ∗ h(t) (2) The measurement of τ carries significant astrophysical implications such as probing electron density fluctuations along FRB sight lines which thereby constrain the degree of plasma turbulence within host-galaxy environments (e.g., S. Xu & B. Zhang 2016; K. Shin et al. 2025), diffused halos of intervening galaxies (e.g., S. K. Ocker et al. 2021) and the large scale ionized structure of the Milky Way (e.g., S. Shivraj Patil et al. 2025) and constraining redshift (e.g., J. M. Cordes et al. 2022) and the Hubble constant (e.g., Yang, Tsung-Ching et al. 2025). There is a rapid rise in the detections of FRBs with commensal real-time surveys on radio telescopes (e.g., CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. 2018; J.-P. Macquart et al. 2010; J. Jonas & MeerKAT Team 2016; M. Sherman & DSA-110 Collaboration 2023). The current detection rate is O(10 3 FRBs yr −1), which is much larger compared to other astronomical radio transient phenomena. This data volume and diversity of the FRBs in morphology, observational instrument, and propagation effects pose significant challenges for extracting physical parameters such as τ from the detected FRBs. Common scattering measurement tools, such as fitburst (E. Fonseca et al. 2024), fit parametric templates to the de-dispersed dynamic spectrum using regression methods. While these techniques can often be accurate, they face significant limitations. Parametric template fitting relies heavily on an adequate initial guess of the parameters and is sensitive to both low signal to noise and complex burst morphologies, thereby often failing to converge. Alternative approaches to estimating scattering timescale include Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (e.g., CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. 2019) and Fourier Transform based deconvolution methods (e.g., N. D. R. Bhat et al. 2003). However, these methods are computationally slow, require extensive per sample manual intervention and thus are not feasible for analyzing large scale datasets. This work mainly relies on the data set from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 ( Chime/FRB Collaboration et al. 2026), the largest catalog of unique FRBs till date, which includes 4545 FRBs, comprising 3564 one-off events and 981 repeating bursts from 83 different sources. The CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 data set consists of radiation in the frequency range of 400-800 MHz encoded as dynamic spectrum into 16,384 frequency bins across 160 time samples of temporal resolution 0.983 ms. The applications of deep learning in FRB science have been primarily focused on classification (e.g., L. Connor & J. van Leeuwen 2018; B. Kharel et al. 2025) and detection (e.g., D. Agarwal et al. 2020). As a novel approach in FRB science, to address the issues with methods of scattering timescale estimation discussed in the above paragraph, we present a deep probabilistic model which estimates the distribution of τ from de-dispersed dynamic spectra and their corresponding pulse pro-files. Instead of treating scattering estimation as deterministic regression, we model the conditional distribution p(τ |x), where x is the burst’s dynamic spectrum. This distribution approximation yields a well-calibrated heteroskedastic 10 uncertainty related to noise associated with the dynamic spec-trum containing an FRB signal, allowing one to construct a confidence interval on point estimates.  

> 10 Uncertainty parameter is data-dependendent.

4 B. Kharel et al. 

The deep probabilistic framework not only estimates the distribution of τ , but also quantifies the Bernoulli probability of τ ≥ 0 as more than 50% of the FRBs have unresolved τ in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 . We organize our work in this paper as follows. In Section 2 we present the methodology under-lying our approach which involves probabilistic formulation of scattering timescale estimation, deep learning architecture used to model the formulated distribution and data sources with preprocessing steps applied. Section 3 presents training details and results which includes evaluation performed on real observations from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 through comparison with fitburst , quantitative validation using simulated data, benchmarking our approach against powerful MCMC based infer-ence and investigation of the robustness of our method under different noise conditions. In Section 4 we discuss the implications of our findings and in Section 5 we outline limitations of our work and directions for future research. Finally, we conclude our work in Section 6.  

> 2.

METHODS 2.1. Mixture Density Network Formulation 

Based on the probabilistic interpretation of regression tasks, it is usually assumed that a target t (a variable that a regression methods seek to predict) for given data point x follows a normal distribution 

p(t|x) ∼ N (t|μ(x), σ 2).

Where μ(x) is the mean of the target distribution and usually taken as point estimate while σ is uncertainty parameter or variance of the target. Here the uncertainty in the target is homoskedastic 11 .The regression is then performed by maximizing the likelihood associated with the training dataset. This is written as ˆθM L = argmax 

> θN

Y

> i=1

N (ti|y(xi, θ ), σ 2),

where, y(xi, θ ) is the linear combination of some linear basis functions or neural network with pa-rameters θ. This formulation is overly generic and assumes the distribution of targets to be a normal distribution which may not be always true for a required specific problem domain. Scattering timescales in FRBs are strictly non-negative (i.e. τ ≥ 0) with the vast majority of FRBs exhibiting minimal scattering with a significantly smaller population displaying large scattering tail. Also, the standard error associated with exponential distributions as in Equation 1 is proportional to the measured value. Given the wide range of observed τ for FRBs, it becomes more appropriate to assume the distribution of scattering timescales to follow lognormal distribution instead of normal distribution. Figure 2 demonstrates that the scattering timescales from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 follow a lognormal distribution. Thus, the distribution of τ for a given dynamic spectrum x of an FRB event can be expressed as 

p(τ |x) = Lognormal  τ |μ(x), σ 2(x) ≡ fLN 

 τ |μ(x), σ 2(x) , (3) where, μ and σ2 are the location and scale parameters of the lognormal distribution, respectively. Here, the scale of the lognormal distribution is data dependent, i.e., heteroskedastic. This het-eroskedastic uncertainty is expected to be larger for dynamic spectrum with low signal to (J. Taylor  

> 11 Variance of the target distribution is data independent

Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 5        

> Figure 2. Left: The distribution of τfrom CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 ( at reference frequency 400 MHz) exhibiting highly skewed heavy tailed profile. Right: Corresponding log transformed (ln τ) distribution. The exhibition of Gaussian shape in the right panel verify that the scattering timescales follow a lognormal distribution.

1997) and is also expected to be scaled along with the scattering timescale as standard error of the expected value of exponential tail is directly proportional to the expected value. Therefore, our re-gression task now becomes maximizing the likelihood associated with the training dataset with the target ( τ ) distribution being lognormal. This regression task can be written as ˆθM L = argmax 

> θN

Y

> i=1

fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)) , (4) where, gθ(xi) can be any arbitrary function which, in our case, is a neural network that approximates 

μi and σi.We can now design and train a neural network to maximize the likelihood in Equation 4. After training, the network approximates the conditional distribution parameters μi and σi for any given input xi. However, a notable challenge arises due to CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 dataset’s zero inflation i.e. a large fraction of the population with zero value of scattering timescale. More than 50% of the events in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 contains FRBs whose scattering timescales are unresolved (i.e. τ ≈ 0), from both repeating. This problem demands standard strategies like discarding the data with unresolved τ or two staged neural network cascaded such that first predicts the presence of scattering and the second regressing the distribution of τ . Both of the methods are suboptimal as discarding significant fraction of dataset can introduce selection bias and cascading multistage network is computationally redundant and introduces additional complexity. Instead, we propose a generic mixture density network (GMDN) which can be written by modifying a mixture density network (C. M. Bishop & H. Bishop 2024) as 

p(τ |x) = 

> K

X

> k=1

πk(x)fk(τ |x; gk(x)) , (5) 6 B. Kharel et al. 

where, πk(x) are mixing coefficients and gk(x) are some functions or neural networks. In our case, if p0(x) denotes the probability of τ = 0 and δ(τ ) the probability mass function at 

τ = 0 then π1(x) = p0(x; gθ(x)) and f1(x) = δ(τ ),π2(x) = 1 − p0(x; gθ(x)) and f2(x) = fLN (τ |x; gθ(x)) . (6) The neural network gθ(x) now predicts the Bernoulli probability of τ ≥ 0 as p0 along with μ and 

σ parameters for the distribution of τ given an input x.Finally, we can maximize the likelihood of the observed training data under the distribution de-scribed by GMDN in Equation 5, i.e. ˆθM L = argmax 

> θN

Y

> i=1

( KX

> k=1

πk(xi)fk(τi|xi; gk(xi)) 

)

. (7) We have thus formulated a GMDN framework that allows a single neural network to model the presence of scattering in an FRB signal along with the distribution of τ . The estimation of the distribution of τ inherently accounts for the heteroskedastic uncertainty as well as enabling a robust confidence interval construction. The choice and architecture of the neural network for maximizing the likelihood in Equation 7 is discussed in the following sections. 2.2. Model Architecture 

We experimented with various neural network architectures, starting with a convolutional neural network (CNN) autoencoder for each dynamic spectrum. CNNs impose translational invariance assuming “spatial stationarity”, referring to uniform distribution of certain features of the image (Y. LeCun et al. 2015), which is not physically justified for scattering morphology. This is because of the fact that the same scattering morphology at the top of the frequency band corresponds to different scattering timescale than at the bottom of the frequency band. Thus, the CNN based regression failed to give good results with R2 < 50% on the regression task. The vision transformer (ViT) (A. Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) has been outperforming CNNs in most tasks but it requires very large training dataset to learn the inductive biases associated with the image data. Due to the limitations with the aforementioned architectures, we designed a transformer archi-tecture for the representation of FRB dynamic spectra where each time bin in dynamic spectrum acts as a token with each token being d-dimensional frequency vector as shown in Figure 14. Upon training the transformer, we observed that the model was overfitting by performing exceptionally well on training data while not being able to generalize on test data. We then computed a frequency-averaged timeseries by collapsing the dynamic spectrum along the frequency axis. This operation produced a one-dimensional timeseries with the time samples equal to that of original dynamic spec-trum. Each time sample is then projected to a d-dimensional vector with a single layer feed forward neural network, thereby creating embedding vectors for each time step. We constructed the same transformer architecture for time series as was developed for the dynamic-spectrum representation described above. However, we observed that the timeseries-based transformer model under-fit the data. Ultimately, we developed a parallel transformer architecture to process both the dynamic spectrum and time series representations but separately and concatenated the contextual output from both of them. This parallel network achieved a performance superior to all other architectures and methods Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 7 

> Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the parallel transformer architecture for our regression task. The model pro-cesses dynamic spectrum and timeseries representations with two independent parallel transformer branches. The resulting contextual embeddings are then concatenated and passed through a final regression head to predict the output values.

discussed before and was free from both overfitting and underfitting (see Section 3.1). The schematic diagram of the multi modal network architecture is shown in Figure 3. A breakdown of the network’s constituent components are discussed in Appendix A. 2.3. Data and preprocessing 

For this work, we used real data acquired with the CHIME telescope presented in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2. The catalog provides de-dispersed dynamic spectra, I(ν, t ), which are cutouts of the total intensity data. This dynamic spectra capture the intensity of FRB sources at different times (t) across different frequency channels ( ν). Each dynamic spectrum consists of 16,384 frequency channels spanning the 400-800 MHz band and ∼160 time samples with a resolution 0.983 ms. This time window is chosen to fully capture both the burst envelope and any scattering tail with the burst peak lying near the center of the window. We applied 64 channel block averaging to downsample frequency channels to 256, which improved the signal to noise while maintaining computational 8 B. Kharel et al. 

tractability. Each dynamic spectrum was then independently min-max normalized: 

I′(ν, t ) = I(ν, t ) − min( I(ν, t )) max( I(ν, t )) − min( I(ν, t )) .

The normalization ensures all inputs lie in the range [0, 1]. Data for the timeseries transformer can be generated by different dimensionality reduction tech-niques along the frequency axis as discussed in Appendix A.2. Each timeseries was also independently min-max normalized ensuring all the timeseries points lie in the range [0, 1]. The target τ values for our regression task are taken from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 , which are reported in milliseconds as measured by the modeling tool fitburst . The target values are processed in such a way that τ ′ = ln( τ ) for τ > 0 and τ ′ = 0 otherwise to compute the objective function in Equation B9. We do not apply any explicit filtering of data samples based on signal to noise ratio, burst width or morphology. This broad inclusion of the data enables the model to learn from the full diversity of FRB population present in the CHIME catalog. Besides CHIME/FRB data, we employ synthetic data generated by simpulse 12 for the model evaluation purposes.  

> 3.

TRAINING AND RESULTS The MT-GMDN was trained exclusively on data from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 . The Catalog 2 dataset was partitioned into train ( ∼3800), validation ( ∼150) and test ( ∼150) sets for the events with valid scattering timescale values and the events with N aN values of scattering timescale were discarded. Training and validation sets were used while training, and test was used to evaluate the trained model. We randomly sampled the events in the partitions from both repeating and non-repeating sources as the repeating sources also display variability in the scattering (e.g., A. Pandhi et al. 2026; S. K. Ocker et al. 2023). The complete set of hyperparameter values adopted for training the MT-GMDN model are detailed in Appendix C. The final model corresponds to the training step achieving the lowest validation loss which is then used for quantitative evaluation and inferences. We used the coefficient of determination ( R2) to assess model performance on the regression task, which is defined by 

R2 = 1 − SS res 

SS tot 

,

where, 

• SS res = Residual sum of squares; 

• SS tot = Total sum of squares. The classification performance was quantified via a confusion matrix displayed in the Figure 7 and the resulting accuracy, recall, precision and F1-scores. 3.1. Quantitative performance on the test set from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 

For the regression task, we computed R2 between the predicted conditional median scattering timescale value ( eμ) and the Catalog 2 value for the test set. The best value of R2 was obtained  

> 12 simpulse: C++/python library for simulating pulses in radio astronomy

Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 9     

> Figure 4. Scatter plot between the MT-GMDN predictions and fitburst measured values of scattering timescales at a reference frequency ( νref ) of 400 MHz. The plot consists of events that have resolved scattering in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 .

to be 94% for the model trained with timeseries computed by spectral averaging discussed in the Section A.2 and only the model performance is discussed in this section. The performances of the models corresponding to timeseries by other methods are discussed in Appendix A.2. Figure 4 shows the comparison between the MT-GMDN predicted scattering timescale values against the fitburst 

measured values in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 . The result shows a strong linear correlation with most of the points symmetrically distributed along the y = x line. Along with the point estimate, we also constructed 95% confidence intervals eμ±1.96 ×σ for the point estimates. Figure 5 presents per sample comparison of MT-GMDN predictions against the 

fitburst measured cataloged values. The vast majority of samples have fitburst values within the confidence interval of the MT-GMDN point estimate. This indicates the model’s reliability not only on the point estimates but also on the well calibrated uncertainty bounds. As illustrated in Figure 5, the uncertainty associated with the point estimate scales with τ , which is consistent with the characteristic property of the exponential scattering tail. Thus the model was consistently able to recover τ values along with uncertainty for individual events across varying signal characteristics demonstrating its robustness. To quantitatively assess the classification performance by the MT-GMDN, we first constructed a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve as shown in Figure 6. This ROC curves yields an area under the curve (AUC) value of 0.87 representing an excellent classifier (D. Hosmer et al. 2013). 10 B. Kharel et al.     

> Figure 5. Test set prediction performance with x-axis denoting discrete FRB samples and y-axis scattering timescale at a reference frequency of 400 MHz. fitburst measured values are shown as blue dots and MT-GMDN point estimates are represented by black dashed lines while the blue shaded region representing 95% confidence interval. Orange squares denote the FRB samples which are out of the 95% confidence interval.

Figure 7 shows a confusion matrix for the scattering event detection at decision threshold of 0.6 (i.e. if p0 >= 0 .6 then τ = 0 else τ > 0). At our chosen threshold, recall value of 90% was achieved and the overall accuracy was 76%. The precision of 63% suggest that the model is sensitive to scattering, and it predicted scattering in profiles that were unresolved in CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 . This conservative approach is critical for ensuring that faint scattering signatures are not overlooked. The decision threshold is an adjustable parameter that can be tuned based on the specific objective of the analysis. For the most balanced performance, we can utilize the ROC curve to determine the optimal value of decision threshold. 3.2. Quantitative performance on simulated data 

To analyze the robustness of the MT-GMDN predictions, we evaluated the performance of the model against a synthetic dataset generated with simpulse framework. We observed a consistent systematic bias in the recovered τ values, where the model was overestimating the predictions relative to the injected ground truth. The systematic bias was observed when modeling with fitburst .This discrepancy likely originates from overestimation of the scattering effect within the simpulse 

simulation backend and/or a fundamental morphological mismatch between the templates used by Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 11  

> Figure 6. Receiver operating characteristic curve for scattering detection by MT-GMDN at different decision threshold values.

fitburst from which our training target labels were derived and numerical methods implemented in the simpulse backend. We accounted this systematic offset by a linear calibration of the model’s point estimate and upper and lower bound of the confidence interval. The linear calibration was obtained by modeling zero-noise dynamic spectra with fitburst for the minimum and maximum values of scattering timescales in the simulated data and then calculating the mean offset factor between the measured and injected values. As illustrated in Figure 8, the systematic offset correction aligns the predictions with the ideal line ( y = x), along with the injected target values falling entirely within the predicted 95% confidence interval. Furthermore, the MT-GMDN captures the measurement uncertainty which are represented by the error bars. These uncertainties scale proportionally with the τ values and is physically expected as higher τ values dominate the pulse morphology and suppresses the signal to noise of the burst. The successful capture of the target values with heteroskedastic uncertainty confirms that the MT-GMDN provides both accurate point estimate and reliable confidence interval for scattering timescale. 3.3. MT-GMDN vs. fitburst on simulated data 

The process of model fitting with fitburst involves two steps. At first, a model without scattering is fitted and the parameters obtained from the first fit is then used to create a model with scattering. Chi-square ( χ2) statistic for each of the fit is computed. These χ2 statistics are then used to obtain F-statistic 

F = χ21 − χ22

χ22

Ndof ,2

∆Nfit 

,12 B. Kharel et al.    

> Figure 7. Confusion matrix for the scattering event detection at a detection threshold value of p0= 0 .6. Here no-scatter refers to unresolved scattering rather than physical absence of scattering. .

where Ndof ,2 is the number of degrees of freedom in the complex model with scattering and ∆ Nfit 

is the difference in the number of free parameters between the two models. Using the F-statistic, 

p-value is obtained which represents the improvement in the fit quality after the introduction of the scatter broadening parameter in the model. To compare the robustness of our MT-GMDN against fitburst , we created common sets of broad-band synthetic events and applied both fitburst and MT-GMDN methods to recover the τ values. 

fitburst performed exceptionally well on the data sets where the signal to noise of the events were high and so did MT-GMDN. However, in the low SNR data set where the scattering tails often get mixed up with the background noise, MT-GMDN outperforms fitburst which is illustrated in Fig-ure 9. To quantify the performance difference between fitburst and MT-GMDN we again employed 

R2 score as a metric for comparison. R2 score of 39% was obtained for fitburst measured values while the R2 score was 68% for MT-GMDN predicted values. Moreover, Figure 9 (Left) for fitburst 

measurement shows significant number of events for which the p-value of F-test are significantly high thereby failing to reject the null hypothesis that the non-scattering model is better fit for data. For some of the events, target values fall out of the 95% confidence interval and uncertainties do not scale well with noise levels and τ values. Figure 9 (Right) shows that all the target values fall within the confidence interval predicted by MT-GMDN with uncertainties scaling well with noise levels and τ values. The 95% confidence intervals are very broad for MT-GMDN method as compared to Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 13           

> Figure 8. Scattering timescale recovery for synthetic broadband pulses generated by simpulse with intrinsic widths of 1 ms. The vertical error bars denote 95% confidence interval with all of the target values within the interval. The MT-GMDN model achieves R2score of 92% on the point estimate of the τvalues. Measurement uncertainty scales with τjustifying the inherent difficulty in characterizing the morphology of the highly scattered profiles.

fitburst at very low signal to noise values of the synthetic bursts ( <8 for bursts with simpulse 

injected value of > 15 ms), however the point estimates and lower bounds are robust as compared to 

fitburst .Besides the performance on recovering τ values from data, MT-GMDN also has computational advantage. fitburst relies on non-linear least squares optimization for each event which is an iterative process and the algorithm time complexity scales up with the number of frequency channels (Nν ), time samples ( Nt) and number of iterations to converge. After the convergence, fitburst 

computes exact Hessian and inverts it to obtain the covariance matrix and hence uncertainty. This operation also scales with Nν and Nt. However, once trained, MT-GMDN has the time complexity of 

O(1) regardless of the complexity of a burst. It has been observed that MT-GMDN achieves inference speed of approximately four orders of magnitude (10 4) faster than fitburst on the retrieval of τ

value and the corresponding uncertainty, enabling real time parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification. 3.4. MT-GMDN vs. MCMC on simulated data 

MCMC can be used to sample from the posterior distribution in Bayesian approach of parameter estimation when marginal likelihood (evidence) over all the possible values of parameters in high dimensional parameter space becomes intractable. We used the same mathematical model as used 14 B. Kharel et al. 

Figure 9. Comparison of fitburst measured values of τ on synthetic data against MT-GMDN predictions. The synthetic data set consists of broadband pulses with maximum SNR for the event with minimum scattering. Fluence for each of the event is held constant such that the SNR gets lower for the events with higher scattering due to the redistribution of radiation energy across time in exponentially decaying tail. Left: 

fitburst measurement with the vertical bars representing 95% confidence interval, the size of the markers corresponding to relative SNR and the colorbar represents p-value of F-test for scattering vs non-scattering model fit. Right: MT-GMDN predictions with vertical bars capturing 95% confidence interval with the marker size corresponding to relative SNR while the marker color representing the probability of scattering. A linear correction factor was applied to both fitburst and MT-GMDN methods. The maximum signal to noise value of the synthetic data was 20 corresponding to the left most point in the plots and minimum was 4 corresponding to the right most point in the plots. 

by fitburst to model the scatter broadening in pulse profile (M. M. McKinnon 2014) given as 

Tkn =

νk

νr

−δ

exp 

 σ2

2τ 2

> k

− (tkn − t0)

τk

  

1 + erf 

tkn − (t0 + σ2/τ k)

σ√2

 

. (8) Here, Tkn is the pulse profile value at kth channel and nth time bin. σ is the Gaussian width of the pulse, t0 is arrival time of the pulse, τk is scattering timescale and δ is the index of scattering accounting for frequency dependence of scattering and was set to 4 which is the empirical standard value for FRBs. νr is the reference frequency which was fixed to 400 MHz for our analysis. The spectrum was modeled by using the running power law model given as 

Fk =

νk

νr

γ+β ln (νkνr )

. (9) Here, γ is spectral index and β is spectral running. Finally, a two dimensional dynamic spectrum Dkn was then modeled by combining Equations 8 and 9 as 

Mkn = AF kTkn , (10) with A = 10 α, the amplitude of overall wave packet characterized by global amplitude parameter α.Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 15  

> Figure 10. Dynamic spectrum of a synthetic FRB with modeled by MCMC method. The injected pulse had an intrinsic width of 1 ms and scattering timescale of 2 ms.

To evaluate the MT-GMDN performance against MCMC on estimating the scattering timescale, we needed to create complete model of each dynamic spectrum in this evaluation. An example of a model generated by MCMC method is shown in Figure 10. Figure 11 illustrates the parameter distributions along with their corresponding 95% credible intervals for the simulated FRB previously displayed in Figure 10. We modeled 50 simulated FRBs with MCMC using lognormal distribution as prior for the τ and extracted the posterior distribution for τ by combining all MCMC chains. The heteroskedasticity was incorporated in the MCMC modeling by passing the noise value of a dynamic spectrum directly to the Gaussian likelihood of the MCMC. The sampler used was “No-U-Turn Sampler” (M. D. Hoffman & A. Gelman 2011) with a burn-in period of 2000 and 4 parallel chains. The comparison plot for MCMC method and MT-GMDN methods is shown in Figure 12. Some of the key metrics comparing the performance of MCMC versus MT-GMDN on both point estimate and uncertainty are summarized in the Table 1. MT-GMDN performs slightly better on root mean square error (RMSE) and R2 score indicating improved predictive accuracy and better explained variance than MCMC. Both of the approaches also demonstrate negligible bias in the point estimation with MT-GMDN slightly better than MCMC. The significant difference between MT-GMDN and MCMC methods is on the the uncertainty modeling behaviors. MT-GMDN exhibits over-coverage, potentially due to conservative estimation of variance in the mixture density framework. However, under-coverage in uncertainty by the MCMC method indicates narrow predictive intervals reflecting its limitations in capturing the full variability of the data. Despite MCMC producing narrower uncertainty intervals, its under-coverage indicates that these intervals are not reliable while MT-GMDN prioritize more conservative but statistically consistent uncertainty estimates at the expense of sharpness. MT-GMDN thus demonstrates competitive or superior point-estimates and lower bounds of the uncertainty interval. 3.5. Heteroskedastic uncertainty modeling by MT-GMDN 

To assess the uncertainty estimation nature of MT-GMDN based on the amount of noise in a dynamic spectrum, we analyze the correlation between the predicted uncertainty parameter ( σ) and SNR of some simulated bursts. Higher SNR samples are expected to yield more precise estimates 16 B. Kharel et al. 

Figure 11. Posterior distribution of some of the model parameters in Equation 10 generated by MCMC method for a simulated FRB shown in the Figure 10. The central vertical line in the corner plots represent median or the point estimate while the first and third vertical lines denote the 95% credible interval. The posterior distributions are obtained by combining the samples from all MCMC sampler chains. The simulated burst had width of 1 ms and scattering time of 2 ms and MCMC method successfully recovered those values as seen in the corner plots for τr as scattering time and σ as the width. 

while lower SNR events are expected to produce broader uncertainty interval. This implies a negative correlation between predictive uncertainty and SNR of FRB events. Figure 13 shows the variation of uncertainty parameter σ with SNR for two representative cases of scattering with scattering timescales of 5 ms (left) and 10 ms (right). As the scatter plots suggest non-linear relationship between σ and SNR, we implemented Spearman correlation method to quantify the correlation in terms of correlation coefficient ρ. We found very strong negative correlations between 

σ and SNR for both cases with statistical significance test yielding p-values of p = 9 .8 × 10 −18 for the Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 17 

Figure 12. Comparison of MCMC vs MT-GMDN performance on the simulated dataset. The size of the markers denote the SNR of corresponding dynamic spectrum and it ranges from 20 to 4 with larger size denoting higher SNR. The error bars for MT-GMDN predictions represent 95% confidence interval and the error bars for MCMC estimates represent 95% credible interval. The pulse width of all the bursts were set to 1 ms. Both the MCMC and MT-GMDN estimations were systematic bias corrected as introduced by 

simpulse .

Table 1. MT-GMDN vs. MCMC Comparison Metrics Metric Equation MT-GMDN MCMC Comments RMSE 

h 1

> N

PNi=1 (ˆ yi − yi)2

i1/2

7.62 7.83 Lower is better 

R2 1 − 

> PNi=1 (yi−ˆyi)2
> PNi=1 (yi−¯y)2

0.71 0.69 Higher is better Bias 1

> N

PNi=1 (ˆ yi − yi) -0.003 -0.068 Ideal ≈ 095% Coverage 1

> N

PNi=1 I(yi ∈ [li, u i]) 1 0.89 Ideal ≈ 0.95 MIW 1

> N

PNi=1 (ui − li) 19.69 2.49 Lower is better if calibrated 

Note —RMSE: Root mean square error, MIW: Mean interval width, ˆ yi: Point estimate, yi:Target, ui: Upper bound estimate, li: Lower bound estimate 18 B. Kharel et al.        

> Figure 13. Relationship between predicted uncertainty parameter ( σ) and SNR for two representative cases. Left plot displays the variation of σwith SNR for simulated events with width of 1 ms and τof 5 ms while the right plot is for simulated events with width of 1 ms and τof 10 ms.

case with τ =5 ms and p = 8 .28 × 10 −23 for the case with τ =10 ms. This confirms that observed correlations are highly unlikely by chance. This statistically significant correlation result confirms that MT-GMDN produces heteroscedastic uncertainty estimates consistent with observational noise properties.  

> 4.

DISCUSSIONS This work demonstrates that FRB morphology can be directly used by a deep learning framework to efficiently and precisely estimate astrophysical parameters such as τ without relying on explicit pulse-shape fitting. The proposed MT-GMDN framework models the full conditional distribution 

p(τ |x) capturing both resolved scattering and heteroskedastic uncertainty in a statistically principled manner. One of the key results is that the model predicts significant fraction of false positives on the test data set from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 as seen in Figure 7. This property of the model should not be interpreted as purely an error because the catalog reported τ = 0 values are only the lower limits but not physically exact zeros. Figure 9 and Appendix E clearly demonstrate that for low SNR and very subtle scattering events the traditional scattering measurement methods might fail. However, MT-GMDN appears to be more sensitive to subtle temporal asymmetries due to low level scattering signatures which are not captured by traditional fitting approaches when operating near the instrumental resolution limit or low SNRs. The choice of conditional median as the primary point estimate of τ instead of mean has been motivated by various factors. One of the main reasons being its robustness to a heavy-tailed lognormal distribution. While the mean is strongly influenced by the large scattering tails, the median often faithfully represents typical scattering timescale imposed by the data. Also, the median of the lognormal corresponds to the exponentiated mean of the underlying normal distribution which allows a convenient construction of the confidence intervals on the point estimation of τ .Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 19  

> 5.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS Despite our MT-GMDN yielding promising results, there are still several limitations that motivates future work. The first limitation is that the model was trained on a very small size of training data set and there were modest number of samples with high τ values ( > 100 ms). This may hinder the model’s performance on accurately characterizing highly scattered events. Furthermore, the model was trained exclusively on total intensity data from CHIME/FRB Catalog 2, generalization to high resolution CHIME/FRB data (baseband data) and also cross instrumental generalization remains to be investigated. Another notable constraint is the model’s maximum temporal window (context length) of 162 time samples. This limits the characterization of events requiring larger temporal extent. To enhance the model performance, future work will involve training the model by augmenting the CHIME/FRB catalog dataset with synthetic bursts injected into real telescope noise. We also plan to incorporate high resolution data sets in the training process allowing the model to better capture subtle burst structures. Additionally, we plan to extend the model architecture to estimate other morphological characteristics beyond the current implementation.  

> 6.

CONCLUSION In this work, we have presented a Multimodal Transformer Based Generic Mixture Density Network to infer an astrophysical parameter τ from burst morphology encoded in a dynamic spectrum. The model jointly estimates the probability of unresolved scattering and the conditional distribution of τ

and thus yielding robust point estimates alongside well-calibrated uncertainty bounds. The introduction of multimodal framework that leverages complementary information from both temporal domain and spectral domain solves the fundamental challenge of limited dataset to train the transformer based architecture. Our probabilistic mixture density formulation provides a robust solution to handle zero-inflated data set during training thus allowing accurate modeling of both scat-tered and unresolved scattered signals. The successful application of the model on real CHIME/FRB test data set and the synthetic test data set demonstrates the robustness and scientific utility of our framework. The proposed framework offers a non-parametric alternative to classical scattering pipelines and can be implemented to automate the large-scale scattering inference. The classical methods are still useful for verification purposes. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge that CHIME is located on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded territory of the Syilx/Okanagan people. We are grateful to the staff of the Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory, which is operated by the National Research Council of Canada. CHIME is funded by a grant from the Canada Foun-dation for Innovation (CFI) 2012 Leading Edge Fund (Project 31170) and by contributions from the provinces of British Columbia, Qu´ ebec and Ontario. The CHIME/FRB project is funded by a grant from the CFI 2015 Innovation Fund (Project 33213) and by contributions from the provinces of British Columbia and Qu´ ebec, and by the Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics at the University of Toronto. Additional support is provided by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR), McGill University and the McGill Space Institute thanks to the Trottier Family Foundation, and the University of British Columbia. The CHIME/Pulsar instrument hardware is 20 B. Kharel et al. 

funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Research Tools and Instruments (RTI-1) grant EQPEQ 458893-2014. M.N. is a Fonds de Recherche du Quebec - Nature et Technologies (FRQNT) postdoctoral fellow. M.W.S acknowledges support from the French government under the France 2030 investment plan, as part of the Initiative d’Excellence d’Aix-Marseille Universit´ e - AMIDEX (AMX-23-CEI- 088). P.S. acknowledges the support of an NSERC Discovery Grant (RGPIN-2024-06266). 

# Software: Numpy (C. R. Harris et al. 2020), Matplotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), PyTorch (A. Paszke et al. 2019), torchvision ( TorchVision maintainers and contributors 2016), pandas (T. pandas devel-opment team 2020), seaborn (M. L. Waskom 2021), fitburst (E. Fonseca et al. 2024), simpulse (K. Smith 2005) DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY The source code used in this work is publicly available on GitHub 13 .APPENDIX  

> A.

BREAKDOWN OF MODEL ARCHITECTURE A.1. Dynamic Spectrum Transformer 

The dynamic spectrum transformer ingests dynamic spectrum which is tokenized along n-dimensional time axis with each token being d-dimensional frequency vector: 

xDS ∈ Rn×d.

This choice of dynamic spectrum input preserves the frequency details for each time stamp and allows   

> Figure 14. Illustration of the tokenization scheme for a dynamic spectrum. Each time stamp acts as a distinct token and the frequency intensities vector at that time stamp serves as token embedding referred to as d-dimensional frequency vector.

the self attention mechanism to model the long range temporal dependencies along with frequency dependent temporal smearing.  

> 13 https://github.com/kharelb/Scattering-Timescale-Estimation-With-Transformers

Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 21  

> Figure 15. Timeseries (pulse profile) created by different dimensionality reduction techniques along the frequency dimension.

The dynamic spectrum transformer is similar to the standard transformer encoder (A. Vaswani et al. 2023) consisting of two encoder layers with each encoder layer containing 4 self-attention heads which performs full self-attention. We experimented with higher number of heads (8, 16) but there was no significant change in the performance of the model yielding the similar values of R2 as given by 4 heads. A.2. Timeseries Transformer 

We can compute timeseries from a dynamic spectrum by performing dimensionality reduction along the frequency axis. Some of the timeseries computation methods include simple spectral averaging, projection onto principal frequency components using principal component analysis (PCA), and quantile computation across frequency channels. Timeseries obtained by different approaches as discussed are shown in Figure 15. Timeseries data thus can be represented as 

xTS ∈ Rn.

The timeseries representation of the dynamic spectrum captures global temporal asymmetry and scattering tails while supressing frequency-dependent structure and thus provides a complementary information to the dynamic spectrum. The projection layer in timeseries transformer projects each scalar timeseries value to d-dimensional vector with a simple feed forward network. Each projected vector corresponding to each time sample in timeseries serves as token embedding which is illustrated in Figure 16. 22 B. Kharel et al.   

> Figure 16. Illustration of the projection layer where each time sample is mapped to d-dimensional learnable embedding vector by a simple feed forward neural network.

The timeseries transformer has the same number of encoder layers and attention heads as the dynamic spectrum transformer. This transformer thus focuses on capturing pulse asymmetry, tail decay structure, temporal sub-components and burst duration variations. A.3. Positional encoding 

To make both of the transformers aware of temporal position, positional embedding vectors were added to both dynamic spectrum representation token embeddings and timeseries representation token embeddings. The same positional embeddings were used for both transformers. ˜xDS = xDS + r

˜xTS = xTS + r

Upon experimenting, learnable positional embedding yielded better result in our case than sinu-soidal positional embedding introduced by A. Vaswani et al. (2023). A.4. Latent representation and fusion 

Each transformer generates a sequence of context rich embeddings of the same shape as input: 

zDS ∈ Rn×d, zTS ∈ Rn×d.

These two feature rich latent representation outputs from the encoders are fused by concatenation: 

z = [ zDS ; zTS ] ∈ Rn×2d

This strategy preserves the modality specific information and also prevents interference between the temporal and spectral features extracted. A.5. Projection and attention pooling 

The fused encoder outputs are then passed through linear projection layer to produce output ˜z = WT z + b, (A1) Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 23   

> Figure 17. A schematic diagram of regression head. The d-dimensional output from the preceding attention pooling layer is passed through a linear layer to obtain the parameters of the mixture density as outputs.

where ˜ z ∈ Rn×d and W and b are weights and bias associated with the linear transformation. We utilize an attention based pooling mechanism to aggregate the output from the last projection layer to a single vector for regression head. We first project each vector from ˜ z corresponding to time step to a scalar score using learnable linear transformation 

e = WT ˜z + b, 

where W and b are learnable parameters. The learned scores are then normalized across the temporal dimension using the softmax function to obtain attention weights αt:

αt = exp( et)

Pnt=1 exp( et)Finally, a weighted sum is performed to produce a global representation 

h =

> n

X

> t=1

αt ˜zt.

This approach allows the model to weight different time stamps dynamically based on their relevance. A.6. Regression head 

The regression head accepts a latent vector h ∈ Rd from the preceding attention pooling layer. The latent vector is then passed through a linear layer to give an output ˜h. It is then fed into three parallel linear heads as shown in Figure 17 which are responsible for distinct distribution parameters of the Bernoulli and lognormal distributions in the mixture density. The three outputs from the regression head are further discussed below. 

Bernoulli head ( fp0 ): It predicts the probability of zero scattering timescale i.e. the Bernoulli probability of the mixture density. 

p0 = σ(fp0 (˜h)) Where σ is standard sigmoid function 

σ(x) = 11 + exp( −x).24 B. Kharel et al. 

Location head ( fμ): It predicts the location parameter of the lognormal distribution in the mixture density. 

μ = fμ(˜h)

Scale head ( fσ): It predicts the scale parameter of the lognormal in the mixture density. 

σ = softplus( fσ(˜h)) Where, softplus( x) = ln(1 + ex)

B. OPTIMIZATION FUNCTION The optimization task in our case is maximizing the likelihood with respect to the mixture density given by Equation 5. So our objective (error) function as seen in Equation 7 is 

E(θ) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

( KX

> k=1

πk(xi)fk(τi|xi; gk(xi)) 

)

. (B2) Where, θ are the weights of the neural network. Using Equations 6, Equation B2 becomes 

E(θ) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

{p0(xi; gθ(xi)) δ(τi) + (1 − p0(xi; gθ(xi)) fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)} . (B3) If p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) is the probability of observing scattering timescale τi for a given sample xi then there arises two cases: 

Case I: τi = 0 :

p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) = p0(xi; gθ(xi)) 

Case II: τi > 0:

p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) = (1 − p0(xi; gθ(xi)) fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)Thus the objective function is: 

E(θ) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) (B4) Instead of maximizing the above expression directly, it becomes computationally efficient to maximize the log transformed value of the above expression. Since, the logarithm is a monotonically increasing function, maximizing above expression is equivalent to maximizing the log transformed value. Thus our objective function can be written as 

E(θ) = 

> N

X

> i=1

ln {p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) } . (B5) Maximizing above equation is equivalent to minimizing the negative of it, so the objective function becomes: 

E(θ) = −

> N

X

> i=1

ln {p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) } . (B6) Now, let us derive the logarithm of probabilities for both cases τi = 0 and τi > 0Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 25 

Case I: τi = 0 : If probability under the model: 

p0(τi = 0 |xi; gθ(xi)) = p0,i 

Then, ln {p0(xi; gθ(xi)) } = ln p0,i (B7) 

Case II: τi > 0: In this case: 

p0(τi > 0|xi; gθ(xi)) = (1 − p0,i )fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)) =⇒ ln p0(τi > 0|xi; gθ(xi)) = ln(1 − p0,i ) + ln fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)) But since, 

fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)) = 1

τiσ√2π exp 



−(ln τi − μi)2

2σ2

> i



=⇒ ln fLN (τi|xi; gθ(xi)) = − ln( τi) − ln( σi) − 12 ln(2 π) − (ln τi − μi)2

2σ2

> i

So, ln p0(τi > 0|xi; gθ(xi)) = ln(1 − p0,i ) − ln( τi) − ln( σi) − 12 ln(2 π) − (ln τi − μi)2

2σ2

> i

(B8) Finally, our error function given by Equation B6 normalized for data size becomes 

E(θ) = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

ln {p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) } (B9) With, ln {p(τi|xi; gθ(xi)) } =



ln p0,i , τi = 0 ,

ln(1 − p0,i ) − ln( τi) − ln( σi) − 12 ln(2 π) − (ln τi−μi)2

> 2σ2
> i

, τi > 0 (B10) Thus the Equation B9 is our final objective function which is minimized during training by gradient descent method. 

C. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND HYPERPARAMETERS In this section, we provide the specific configuration and hyperparameter settings used during training to ensure the reproducibility of our results. The model architecture was implemented with deep learning framework PyTorch (A. Paszke et al. 2019) and was trained on NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU provided by Dolly Sods 14 . All the model architectural parameters were set through manual tuning on the validation dataset. The checkpoint that achieved the minimum validation loss was the best model with robust configuration for generalization presented in Table 2.  

> 14 A high performance computing cluster at West Virginia University.

26 B. Kharel et al.                                       

> Table 2. MT-GMDN Hyperparameter Configuration Category Hyperparameter Value Description Architecture Transformer Heads 4Multi-head attention count Encoder Layers 3Number of stacked transformer blocks Embedding Dim ( dmodel )256 Latent vector size FFNN Dimension 2048 Feed-forward hidden layer size Dropout Rate 0.1 Regularization to prevent overfitting MDN Hidden Units [256 ,256] Neurons in the mixture density head Training Batch Size 32 Number of samples per iteration Learning Rate 1×10 −4Learning rate for optimizer Weight Decay 0.09 L2regularization penalty Max Epochs 400 Total training iterations Optimizer AdamW Optimization algorithm Data Temporal Window 162 Maximum input time samples Frequency Channels 256 Spectral channels of dynamic spectra
> Note —The hyperparameters for both dynamic spectrum and timeseries transformers are same. D.

MODEL PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT TIMESERIES APPROACHES The estimation of scattering timescale with MT-GMDN relies on reduction of two dimensional dynamic spectrum into a corresponding one dimensional timeseries. While there are different statis-tical approaches to generate timeseries from a dynamic spectrum, in this work we utilized spectral mean, frequency quantiles, and first principal frequency component using principal component anal-ysis (PCA) and evaluated their performance after training. The best performing model was achieved on spectral mean approach and is explained in Section 3. Figure 18 presents the evaluation of different alternative approaches other than spectral mean on the real test data set. The results suggests that these methods peform reliably at low scattering timescales but they struggle for pulses exhibiting significant scattering tails.  

> E.

MODEL COMPARISON WITH SOME INDIVIDUAL SYNTHETIC BURSTS Here, we present a comparison between simpulse generated pulses, fitburst measured values and corresponding p-values of F-test for scattering detections and the estimates from the MT-GMDN. Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 27  

> Figure 18. Evaluation of MT-GMDN performance across four different timeseries extraction methods.

All of the examples in the Figure 19 have intrinsic width of 1 ms and same fluence values while noise levels vary between the bursts. p-values from fitburst measurements dictates the existence of scattering in a burst while prediction probability of scattering dictates the presence of scattering by MT-GMDN approach. Examining these individual bursts with aforementioned methods provides an insight on how MT-GMDN performs across different burst profiles. We can observe that MT-GMDN maintains prediction accuracy of τ values in various regimes where fitburst returns non significant p-values (p > 0.05) or even when fitburst fails to detect a burst in a highly scattered low SNR profile. 28 B. Kharel et al.            

> Figure 19. Each panel includes two sub-panels with the first sub-panel containing a simulated dynamic spectrum and the corresponding timeseries. While the second sub-panel describes real injected τvalue, the MT-GMDN point estimate with 95% confidence interval, and the fitburst fit statistics. The uncertainty provided for the fitburst measurement here corresponds to the 1 σlimits. All the τvalues are referenced at 400 MHz. F.

SOME FRBS WITH STRONG NOISE AND RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE To demonstrate significance of MT-GMDN, we present a set of representative FRBs shown in the Figure 20 from the CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 that are affected by noise and radio frequency interference (RFI). Due to the strong noise and heavy RFI, extracting any physical information such as τ is very challenging by traditional methods discussed before. Despite the challenges, MT-GMDN produces visibly stable predictions with increased uncertainty to lower quality observations as displayed in Figure 20. Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 29    

> Figure 20. Representative FRBs from the CHIME/FRB Catalog 2 where traditional methods failed to extract physical parameters due to strong noise and RFI. Each panel includes two sub-panels with the first sub-panel (left) containing a dynamic spectrum and the corresponding timeseries, while the second sub-panel (right) contains MT-GMDN estimates. The estimates include probability of scattering, point estimate for τ
> value and its 95% predictive interval. G.

ALTERNATIVE GAMMA MIXTURE DENSITY FORMULATION As seen above from results, the lognormal formulation can produce wide upper confidence bounds for events with higher scattering and/or lower signal to noise. This is because, the variance is computed in the log scale and then transformed back to linear scale. A very small variation of σ

in log scale can lead to large variation in the linear scale. One alternative to resolve the inflated confidence interval upper bound can be the use of distribution in the mixture density formulation with lighter tail than lognormal. Also the distribution should be strictly positive and operating in linear scale. Gamma distribution satisfies all of the properties of alternative distribution discussed above. In this section, we examine the effect of distribution on confidence interval width by replacing the lognormal with the gamma distribution in the mixture density formulation in Equation 5. Gamma distribution for a random variable x is given by 

f (x; α, β ) = βαxα−1e−βx 

Γ( α) , (G11) where α is the shape parameter, β is rate parameter and Γ( α) is the Gamma function. Following Section B, we can easily compute the error function by replacing f2(x) in Equation 6 by the Gamma distribution. The logarithm term in Equation B10 thus gets modified to log p(τi | xi) = 



log p0,i , τi = 0 ,

log(1 − p0,i ) + αi log βi − log Γ( αi) + ( αi − 1) log τi − βiτi, τi > 0.

(G12) 30 B. Kharel et al.     

> Figure 21. Test set prediction performance with x-axis denoting discrete FRB samples and y-axis scattering timescale at a reference frequency of 400 MHz. The mixture density formulation here implements the Gamma distribution instead of the Lognormal distribution. fitburst measured values are shown as blue dots and MT-GMDN point estimates are represented by black dashed lines while the blue shaded region representing 95% confidence interval. Orange squares denote the FRB samples which are out of the 95% confidence interval.

The neural network was then trained to estimate the parameters of the Gamma distribution and the Bernoulli’s parameter in the mixture density formulation. Point estimate was computed by the median of the target distribution with the upper and the lower bounds defined by 0.025 and 0.975 quantiles respectively. Figure 21 shows per sample comparison of MT-GMDN predictions against the 

fitburst measured values after replacing the Lognormal distribution by the Gamma distribution in mixture density formulation for the test data set. R2-score of 88% was achieved which represents slight degradation in the point estimation with the Gamma distribution method. However, it can be clearly seen from Figures 5 and 21 that the width of the confidence interval in Gamma distribution method produces much more narrower confidence intervals than that of Lognormal distribution method. This can be quantified by the MIW defined in the Table 1. The MIW with the Gamma distribution is 32.74 while with the Lognormal distribution is 56.38. The classification performances with both the Gamma and Lognormal distributions in the mixture density formulation remained almost identical since Bernoulli’s distribution was used in both of the cases for classification. Estimating Scattering Timescale of FRBs by Transformer 31 Thus the Gamma component can significantly reduce the inflated confidence intervals for the high scattering and/or low signal to noise dynamic spectrum at the expense of slightly degraded R2-score in the point estimate. REFERENCES 

Agarwal, D., Aggarwal, K., Burke-Spolaor, S., Lorimer, D. R., & Garver-Daniels, N. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 497, 1661, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1856 Bhat, N. D. R., Cordes, J. M., & Chatterjee, S. 2003, ApJ, 584, 782, doi: 10.1086/345775 Bishop, C. M., & Bishop, H. 2024, Deep Learning: Foundations and Concepts (Springer), doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4 CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al. 2018, ApJ, 863, 48, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad188 CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al. 2019, Nature, 566, 230, doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0867-7 Chime/FRB Collaboration, Abbott, T., Andersen, B. C., et al. 2026, ApJS, 283, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ae3828 Connor, L., & van Leeuwen, J. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 256, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae649 Cordes, J. M., & McLaughlin, M. A. 2003, ApJ, 596, 1142, doi: 10.1086/378231 Cordes, J. M., Ocker, S. K., & Chatterjee, S. 2022, Astrophys. J., 931, 88, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6873 Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., et al. 2021, An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale, https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 Fonseca, E., Pleunis, Z., Andersen, B. C., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 272, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad27d6 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Hoffman, M. D., & Gelman, A. 2011, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1111.4246, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1111.4246 Hosmer, D., Lemeshow, S., & Sturdivant, R. 2013, Applied Logistic Regression: Third Edition (wiley), doi: 10.1002/9781118548387 Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55 Jonas, J., & MeerKAT Team. 2016, in MeerKAT Science: On the Pathway to the SKA, 1, doi: 10.22323/1.277.0001 Kharel, B., Fonseca, E., Brar, C., et al. 2025, Repeating vs. Non-Repeating FRBs: A Deep Learning Approach To Morphological Characterization, https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.06208 LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. 2015, Nature, 521, 436 Lorimer, D. R., Bailes, M., McLaughlin, M. A., Narkevic, D. J., & Crawford, F. 2007, Science ,318, 777, doi: 10.1126/science.1147532 Lorimer, D. R., & Kramer, M. 2004, Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy, Vol. 4 (Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press) Macquart, J.-P., Bailes, M., Bhat, N. D. R., et al. 2010, PASA, 27, 272, doi: 10.1071/AS09082 McKinnon, M. M. 2014, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 126, 476, doi: 10.1086/676975 Ocker, S. K., Cordes, J. M., & Chatterjee, S. 2021, ApJ, 911, 102, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abeb6e Ocker, S. K., Cordes, J. M., Chatterjee, S., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 519, 821, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3547 pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, latest Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134 Pandhi, A., Nimmo, K., Andrew, S., et al. 2026, ApJL, 1000, L53, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae52f8 Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., et al. 2019, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (Curran Associates, Inc.), 8024–8035 Sherman, M., & DSA-110 Collaboration. 2023, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 241, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #241, 239.04 Shin, K., Leung, C., Simha, S., et al. 2025, Astrophys. J., 993, 208 32 B. Kharel et al. 

Shivraj Patil, S., Main, R. A., Fonseca, E., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2509.06721, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.06721 Smith, K. 2005, simpulse: C++/python library for simulating FRBs and pulsars,, https://github.com/kmsmith137/simpulse Taylor, J. 1997, Introduction to Error Analysis, the Study of Uncertainties in Physical Measurements, 2nd Edition TorchVision maintainers and contributors. 2016, TorchVision: PyTorch’s Computer Vision library,, https://github.com/pytorch/vision GitHub Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., et al. 2023, Attention Is All You Need, https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 Waskom, M. L. 2021, Journal of Open Source Software, 6, 3021, doi: 10.21105/joss.03021 Williamson, I. P. 1974, MNRAS, 166, 499, doi: 10.1093/mnras/166.3.499 Xu, S., & Zhang, B. 2016, ApJ, 832, 199, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/832/2/199 Yang, Tsung-Ching, Hashimoto, Tetsuya, Hsu, Tzu-Yin, et al. 2025, A&A, 693, A85, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450823