NICER neutron stars with dark energy and dark matter: effects on the inferred
equation of state
Nathan Rutherford,1, 2, ∗Chanda Prescod-Weinstein,1, † and Anna L. Watts3, 4, ‡
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Hampshire, Durham, New Hampshire 03824, USA
2Foundational Questions Institute (FQxI),
235 Ponce de Leon Place, Suite M #217 Decatur, GA 30030, USA
3Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam,
Science Park 904, 1098XH Amsterdam, the Netherlands
4Gravitation and Astroparticle Physics Amsterdam (GRAPPA),
University of Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands
In this work, we compare neutron star configurations where dark energy or dark matter
are present in the core, contrasting them against a baseline of pure baryonic stars with the
same central energy density. From this comparison, we find that the dark energy models
are more constrained by neutron star observations than the dark matter models, suggesting
that neutron stars can place strong constraints on the dark energy parameter space. We
consider four configurations: purely baryonic neutron stars, baryonic neutron stars admixed
with bosonic or fermionic asymmetric dark matter (ADM) cores, and neutron stars with
a dark energy core and baryonic shell, where the dark energy is described by the modified
Chaplygin dark fluid (MCDF). The baryonic equation of state (EoS) is described by a
piecewise polytropic (PP) EoS in the core, connected to results from chiral effective field
theory up to 1.5 times nuclear saturation density. Using NICER and radio pulsar timing
measurements of the masses and radii of PSR J0740+6620 and PSR J0437−4715, as well as
the NICER mass-radius measurement of PSR J0030+0451, we employ Bayesian inference to
investigate how accounting for bosonic/fermionic ADM and MCDF cores affects the inferred
EoS and neutron star properties. We find that MCDF cores, more than PP and ADM
admixed models, substantially broaden neutron star mass-radius and pressure-energy density
posterior distributions. Moreover, the MCDF EoS parameters can be tightly constrained by
neutron star mass-radius observations. While bosonic and fermionic ADM cores decrease
the inferred maximum mass, their posteriors strongly coincide with those of the PP model
for ADM mass-fractions Fχ ≤5%. These results demonstrate that current mass-radius
observations cannot rule out MCDF cores, but they can constrain the MCDF parameter space
to narrow regions. ADM admixed neutron stars, however, remain observationally identical
to purely baryonic stars for all explored mass-fractions, even with improved mass-radius
uncertainties. This suggests that mass-radius measurements alone are insufficient to detect
ADM core inside neutron stars and that independent astrophysical or particle physics probes
will be required.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to observations of anisotropies in
the cosmic microwave background (CMB), the
total mass-energy density of the Universe is dom-
inated by two unknown substances, namely dark
matter and dark energy. In particular, the Uni-
verse comprises about 68% dark energy, 27% dark
matter, and only 5% baryonic matter [1]. Within
the context of the standard model of cosmol-
∗Corresponding author: nathan.rutherford@fqxi.org
† chanda.prescod-weinstein@unh.edu
‡ A.L.Watts@uva.nl
ogy, i.e., the ΛCDM model, the presence of cold
dark matter can explain the rotation curves of
galaxies [2–4], the mass distribution of the Bullet
cluster [5], fluctuations in the CMB [1, 6], and
images of strongly gravitationally lensed systems
[7]. Moreover, the presence of dark energy, in the
form a positive and non-vanishing cosmological
constant Λ, provides excellent agreement with
the observations of the accelerated expansion
of the Universe [see, e.g., 8–10]. However, de-
spite its successes, the ΛCDM model faces a few
challenges: we have yet to identify which dark
matter candidate is the correct one; the Hubble
tension is not resolved; and the cosmic coinci-
arXiv:2609.14494v1  [astro-ph.HE]  13 Sep 2026


2
dence problem and fine-tuning problems remain
a challenge[11–14]. While researchers explore a
plethora of dark matter proposals, the Hubble
tension, cosmic coincidence, and fining tuning all
suggest that Λ may be need to be replaced by
a dynamical alternative. Such proposals include
modified gravity theories, quintessence models,
exotic dark fluids with positive energy density
and negative pressures, extra dimensions, among
others [see 15, for a review].
One dark energy model that has been pro-
posed to address the issues with the cosmological
constant Λ, is the Chaplygin dark fluid (CDF),
which unifies dark matter and dark energy as
a single fluid [16]. The equation of state (EoS)
describing the CDF is given by P = −A/ϵ, where
P is the pressure, ϵ is the energy density, and A is
a positive constant. The CDF is a well-motivated
unified model of dark energy and dark matter
because it simultaneously provides an explana-
tion for the transition of dust-like matter in the
early Universe to the current period of cosmic
acceleration [17]. However, the CDF was found
to be in tension with multiple observations, such
as gamma-ray bursts and Type Ia supernovae
[see 18, and references therein]. In order to ad-
dress these issues, several variants of the CDF
have been proposed in the literature, namely the
generalized CDF (P = −A/ϵγ, where γ ∈(0, 1])
[19], the modified CDF (P = Aϵ −B/ϵγ, where
A and B are positive constants) [20], and the
so-called new generalized CDF (P = −A(a)/ϵγ,
where a is the cosmological scale factor) [21]. Us-
ing high-redshift quasar data, [18] showed that
the modified CDF (MCDF) strongly agrees with
the observations, while the generalized CDF and
the new generalized CDF cannot be distinguished
from the ΛCDM.
If dark energy is evenly distributed through-
out the Universe as observations suggest, then
it could be inside the cores of neutron stars and
affect their measurable properties [22–33]. Dark
energy can generate two types of stars: neutron
star-like objects in which the star is described as
the EoS of the assumed dark energy model [22–
26, 28] and a hybrid star with a dark energy core
and a baryonic matter shell [29–32]. Both types
of stars have been shown to produce maximum
masses above 2M⊙with radii between 10-14 km,
thus satisfying the current neutron star obser-
vational data from radio pulsar measurements
of [34–40] and NASA’s Neutron Star Interior
Composition Explorer (NICER; [41]) [29, 31, 32].
Although purely dark energy stars have been
shown to satisfy the NICER data, such stars are
not directly observable by NICER. This leaves
open the question of how observations by NICER
and similar instruments may provide insights into
the hybrid scenario, where there is both a dark
energy core and also a baryonic matter shell.1
In contrast to the recent literature on the af-
fects of MCDF cores on neutron star properties,
there is a substantial body of literature suggesting
that dark matter, too, can accumulate inside neu-
tron stars and affect their masses, radii, and tidal
deformabilities [see, e.g., 42–68]. There are two
spatial regimes in which dark matter can accumu-
late: inside the core of the neutron star interior
and a dark matter halo that extends through and
beyond the baryonic surface. In a dark matter
core configuration, the neutron star mass, radius,
and tidal deformabilities are reduced compared to
a star with an identical baryonic central energy
density [46, 52, 54, 69–72]. Generally, if dark
matter forms a halo, neutron star masses and
tidal deformabilities increase [47, 50, 53, 61, 73].
If the dark matter halo is sufficiently compact,
it can mimic a dark matter core and reduce the
masses and radii of these stars [64]. More re-
cently, Shawqi et al. [65] investigated the effects
of rotation on dark matter halo distributions and
found that rapid rotation of the baryonic portion
of the neutron star reduces the dark matter halo
radius compared to the same non-rotating neu-
tron star. Beyond these structural effects, the
presence of a dark matter halo also modifies the
exterior spacetime and alters the trajectories of
photons emitted from the neutron star surface,
thereby changing the interpretation of NICER
measurements [53, 64, 65, 74]. Since dark matter
can affect the measurable properties of neutron
1 Recently, Araujo et al. [33] showed that neutron stars
can be modeled as three component stars of bary-
onic matter, dark energy, and dark matter, and si-
multaneously match the data provided by NICER and
LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA. Although the configurations dis-
cussed in Araujo et al. [33] are physically interesting,
we will leave analyzing these systems for future work.


3
stars, the possible presence of dark matter, along
with the presence of dark energy cores, should
be accounted for in analyses of neutron stars.
To investigate the structural impact of dark
matter and dark energy cores within neutron star
interiors, we need mass and radius measurements
of neutron stars. This is because different interior
compositions, whether purely baryonic, admixed
with dark matter, or containing a dark energy
core, predict distinct mass-radius relations, mak-
ing these measurements a strong probe of the
neutron star EoS. Mass and radius measurements
can therefore constrain which EoS models are con-
sistent with the observed neutron stars, and in
turn place bounds on the properties of a possible
dark matter or dark energy component present
in the interior.
In practice, the NICER and radio timing mea-
surements are used to constrain the neutron star
mass-radius relation, which is the relation of all
possible, stable neutron star masses and radii
corresponding to an EoS [75]. The dense mat-
ter EoS describes the relationship of pressure
as a function of energy density throughout the
star and theoretically encodes the microphys-
ical behavior of the matter inside the stellar
interior.
By computing the mass-radius rela-
tion for a specific EoS and comparing it to the
NICER measurements, it is possible to constrain
the dense matter EoS. In order to derive the
masses and radii of neutron stars, NICER em-
ploys Pulse Profile Modeling [PPM, see 76–79],
the relativistic ray-tracing Bayesian inference
technique that exploits the thermal emission from
hot spots on the surface of millisecond pulsars.
The PPM analysis delivers the posterior proba-
bility distributions of not only the masses and
radii of neutron stars, but also other important
parameters, such as hot spot geometry, temper-
ature, and inclination.
To date, NICER has
delivered PPM derived mass-radius posteriors
for five millisecond pulsars: PSR J0740+6620
[PSR J0740 from hereon; 39, 80–87],
PSR
J0030+0451 [PSR J0030 from hereon; 84, 88–92],
PSR J0437−4715 [PSR J0437 from hereon; 93–
95], PSR J1231−1411 [PSR J1231 from hereon;
96, 97], PSR J0614−3329 [PSR J0614 from
hereon; 98–101], PSR J1614−2230 [PSR J1614
from hereon; 102, 103], and PSR J2124−3358
[J2124 from hereon; 104]2 These mass-radius mea-
surements have been extensively investigated in
EoS studies concerning only baryonic matter [see,
e.g., 82, 89, 100, 105–119] and also dark matter
admixed neutron stars [see, e.g., 53, 56, 60, 120–
123].
Two works, Pretel et al. [31] and Araujo et al.
[29], have used the derived NICER PPM mass-
radius measurements and gravitational wave mea-
surements from LIGO/VIRGO in the context of
dark energy cores inside neutron star interiors.
Araujo et al. [29] modeled neutron stars with
dark energy cores as an admixed system, where
the vacuum energy EoS (p = −ϵ) is used for the
dark energy component and several tabulated
nuclear EoS models for the baryonic component.
To characterize the impact of the vacuum en-
ergy EoS, the authors defined the energy den-
sity fraction y, which described the ratio of the
baryonic energy density to summed energy den-
sities of dark energy and baryonic matter. Using
these EoS models in an admixed system and
the energy density fraction, the authors gener-
ated neutron star mass-radius and mass-tidal
deformabilities, and compared them to the mea-
surements of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, GW170817
[124], GW190425 [125], PSR J0348+0432 [35],
and PSR J1614+2230 [34]. The results of Araujo
et al. [29] showed increasing y reduces neutron
star masses, radii, and tidal deformabilities. In
addition, the authors placed limits on the maxi-
mum value of y for several nuclear EoS models.
In Pretel et al. [31], the authors consider neutron
stars with a dark energy core surrounded by a
baryonic matter shell, where the transition from
2 Since the constraints for PSR J1231 and PSR J2124 are
relatively weak compared to those of the other sources,
it will be excluded from the remainder of this analysis.
Furthermore, since Mauviard et al. [100] showed that
the inferred neutron star mass-radius relation and the
resulting EoS constraints remains consistent with prior
analyses to within one standard deviation regardless of
the inclusion of PSR J0614. Consequently, we exclude
this source from this analysis. Finally, during the writ-
ing of this manuscript, the PPM-derived posteriors [103]
and subsequent EOS analysis [105] of PSR J1614 were
published. Although PSR J1614’s high gravitational
mass would be interesting to include in this analysis,
we leave including this source to future work due to the
high computational cost of re-performing our Bayesian
inferences.


4
the core to shell was described using a rapid first-
order phase transition. Here, they model the core
using the MCDF EoS with γ = 1 and two physics
motivated nuclear EoS models. The authors then
compared the effects of the MCDF EoS parame-
ters, namely the barotropic pressure constant A
and phase transition jump parameter α, to the
measurements of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, and
GW170817. Pretel et al. [31] found that vari-
ations of α and A can significantly impact the
properties of neutron stars and remain consistent
with observations.
Here, both studies investi-
gated the impact of dark energy cores on neutron
star properties and determined that they can
remain in agreement with observations.
In this paper we investigate how to use
Bayesian inference to constrain MCDF cores and
compare those inferences to ones for neutron
stars made of purely baryonic matter and infer-
ences for dark matter admixed cores. We assume
the dark energy core is modeled as the MCDF
EoS considered in Pretel et al. [31]. In order
to construct the dark matter cores, we assume
the dark matter could be described by either the
bosonic or fermionic asymmetric (ADM) models
developed in Nelson et al. [47] and investigated
in Rutherford et al. [56], Rutherford et al. [60].
Since the baryonic physics inside neutron star
interiors is not fully understood at the nuclear
level, we adopt the Hebeler et al. [126] piecewise
polytropic model and the Keller et al. [127] chiral
effective field theory calculations to characterize
baryonic matter and account for the uncertainties
associated with the baryonic EoS. We consider
the derived NICER mass-radius measurements
of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, PSR J0437 reported
in Salmi et al. [85], Vinciguerra et al. [91], and
Choudhury et al. [93], respectively. One of the
main objectives of this work is to explore the ef-
fects of dark energy cores on the inferred neutron
star properties and compare them to inferences
of neutron stars comprised of baryonic matter
and admixed with ADM, respectively.
In addition to the main objective on the ef-
fects of MCDF cores on inferred neutron star
properties, this work has two other objectives:
the first is to determine the promise of constrain-
ing the MCDF EoS parameters using NICER
neutron star measurements and the other is to
investigate if ADM admixed neutron stars remain
indistinguishable from purely baryonic neutron
stars for high ADM mass-fractions, thus extend-
ing the results of our previous work, Rutherford
et al. [60].
The work presented here shows that neutron
stars with MCDF cores substantially impact the
dense matter EoS a priori and a posteriori when
compared to the PP model and ADM admixed
models. In particular, both the prior and pos-
terior inferences reveal that neutron stars with
MCDF cores broaden the dense matter EoS pres-
sures at intermediate densities and prefer sub-
stantially higher maximum masses compared to
that of the PP model and ADM admixed mod-
els. Moreover, this work shows NICER mass-
radius measurements can place stringent con-
straints on the MCDF EoS parameters, namely
the barotropic pressure constant and the phase
transition density. Finally, in Rutherford et al.
[60], we performed a Bayesian analysis on neutron
stars admixed with fermionic ADM cores, and
found that the posteriors accounting for fermionic
ADM were indistinguishable from those that ne-
glected fermionic ADM for mass-fraction below
1.7% and mass-radius observational uncertainties
at or above the 2% level. Expanding on this from
our prior work in Rutherford et al. [60], we find
that ADM admixed neutron stars, regardless of
whether they are bosonic or fermionic in nature,
are as equally consistent with the NICER data
as purely baryonic stars for ADM mass-fractions
below 5%.
The remainder of this work is organized as
follows. In Sec. II, we define the MCDF, bosonic
and fermionic ADM, and baryonic EoS mod-
els. In Sec. III, we describe the numerical ap-
proach to computing neutron star properties
with ADM and MCDF cores using the two-fluid
TOV and single-fluid TOV equations, respec-
tively. Sec. IV discusses our Bayesian parameter
estimation framework for computing the inferred
dense matter EoS. In Sec. V, we define the PP
EoS priors, the bosonic and fermionic ADM EoS
priors, MCDF EoS priors, and the considered
NICER mass-radius measurements. In Sec VI,
we first discuss the impact of fermionic ADM,
bosonic ADM, and MCDF cores on the EoS pri-
ors relative to the PP model priors, and then


5
turn to their respective effects on the inferred
dense EoS and neutron star properties. Sec. VI
also addresses the constraints on the MCDF EoS
parameters. Lastly, we summarize our results
and conclude in Sec. VII.
II.
EOS MODELS
In this work, we examine four distinct config-
urations of neutron stars: ones made entirely of
baryonic matter, ones made of an admixture of
both ADM and baryonic matter, and ones featur-
ing a dark energy core surrounded by a shell of
baryonic matter. In this section, we describe the
EoSs of baryonic matter, the Nelson et al. [47]
ADM model, and the MCDF model employed to
generate these neutron star models.
A.
Baryonic EoS
In order to capture the uncertainties associ-
ated with the baryonic matter EoS, we need to
make prior assumptions over all plausible densi-
ties. Therefore, we use the piecewise polytropic
(PP) high-density EoS extension of Hebeler et al.
[126], which describes three polytropes divided
by two varying transition densities, to span the
range of possible EoSs beyond 1.5n0, where
n0 = 0.16 fm−3 is the nuclear saturation den-
sity. The value of 1.5n0 marks the approximate
upper boundary of validity for chiral effective
field theory (χEFT) calculations, beyond which
the theoretical uncertainties grow rapidly and
are too large reliably constrain the dense matter
EoS, thus necessitating a more parametric high-
density extension [126, 128, 129]. We employ the
PP model to parametrize baryonic microphysics
because its parameterized nature allows us to
explore a broad range of the physically permissi-
ble mass-radius plane while remaining versatile
enough to fit a wide variety of tabulated, physics-
motivated EoS models [126, 130, 131], meaning
that when adequately sampled it is capable of
faithfully capturing the full uncertainties of the
baryonic EoS. This flexibility, combined with the
integration of χEFT results at lower densities to
ensure physical accuracy in that regime, makes
the PP model a well-motivated and reliable frame-
work for parameterizing baryonic microphysics
across all relevant densities.
At densities below ≈0.5n0, we consider the
Baym-Pethick-Sutherland (BPS) crust EoS [132].
The BPS model is considered here to describe
the outer and inner crust, providing a consis-
tent thermodynamic baseline before reaching the
density regime where χEFt becomes the more
appropriate framework describing the bulk nu-
cleon interaction. We then connect to the χEFT
calculations of Keller et al. [127] to capture the
uncertainties of the baryonic EoS up to 1.5n0.
We choose the Keller et al. [127] calculations
specifically because they represent one of the
most up-to-date next-to-next-to-next leading or-
der (N3LO) χEFT frameworks and provide a
well quantified uncertainty band over the den-
sity range in which χEFT calculations are rel-
evant. To model the Keller et al. [127] χEFT
framework, we follow our prior work Ruther-
ford et al. [115], and fit a single polytrope to
the Keller et al. [127] N3LO χEFT calcula-
tions for densities ranging from 0.5n0 to 1.5n0.
Within the density range of [0.5n0, 1.5n0], we
find that the Keller et al. [127] χEFT band is
well fitted by KχEFT ∈[2.207, 3.056] MeV fm−3,
ΓχEFT ∈[2.361, 2.814], where KχEFT and ΓχEFT
are the matching constant and adiabatic index,
respectively.
B.
Bosonic & fermionic ADM model
The ADM model is motivated by the obser-
vation that the mass density of dark matter in
the Universe is about five times that of bary-
onic matter, suggesting deep ties in the cosmic
history of dark matter and baryons [133, 134].
In the ADM paradigm, the connection between
the baryon and dark matter mass densities arises
naturally when an asymmetry between the dark
matter and anti-dark matter number densities is
connected to the baryon asymmetry in the early
Universe. Therefore, the dark matter density is
determined by its own asymmetry as opposed
to being set by its annihilation cross-section. A
“dark asymmetry” like this would allow for sig-
nificant repulsive self-interactions and small at-
tractive interactions with baryons. In addition,


6
significant ADM self-interactions could address
some of the tensions between the predictions of
collisionless cold dark matter and observations
on galactic and sub-galactic scales [see 134, and
references therein].
The Nelson et al. [47] ADM model describes
a MeV-GeV mass-scale bosonic or fermionic dark
matter particle with repulsive self-interactions
mediated by a eV-MeV mass-scale vector gauge
boson, ϕµ. Repulsive interactions are necessary
to stabilize the bosonic dark matter structure
against gravitational collapse, whereas in the
fermionic case the Fermi degeneracy pressure pro-
vides the necessary stabilization against gravity.
These differing constructions motivate a separate
treatment between the bosonic and fermionic
cases, rather than considering one in this analy-
sis. This is because these two stabilization mech-
anisms are fundamentally different, the bosonic
and fermionic ADM cases have differing allowed
ADM parameter spaces because the self-repulsion
is allowed to be zero in the fermionic case, which
in-turn also expands the allowed fermionic ADM
particle mass compared to that of the bosonic
case [see, Sec. V and 56, 60]. In addition, the vec-
tor gauge boson also carries the Standard Model
baryon number, which is needed to create a “dark
asymmetry” in the early Universe.
By assuming that all of the ADM particles
have thermally equilibrated with the baryons in-
side the neutron star, the ADM EoS can be com-
puted at zero temperature. Furthermore, given
that the ADM particles are in the dense baryonic
background of the neutron star, the mean-field
approximation can be employed.
Within the
mean-field approximation framework,s given by
the Nelson et al. [47] bosonic ADM EoS, in terms
of ℏand c, is given by
ϵχ = mχc2nχ + g2
χ
2m2
ϕ
ℏ3
c n2
χ
(1)
Pχ =
g2
χ
2m2
ϕ
ℏ3
c n2
χ,
(2)
where ϵχ is the ADM energy density, Pχ is the
ADM pressure, and nχ is the ADM number den-
sity. While the Nelson et al. [47] fermionic ADM
EoS, in units of ℏand c restored, is
ϵχ = c5m4
χ
8π2ℏ3
hp
1 + z2(2z3 + z)
−ln(z +
p
1 + z2)
i
+ g2
χ
2m2
ϕ
c5(mχz)6
ℏ3(3π2)2
(3)
Pχ = c5m4
χ
8π2ℏ3
hp
1 + z2
2
3z3 −z

+ ln(z +
p
1 + z2)
i
+ g2
χ
2m2
ϕ
c5(mχz)6
ℏ3(3π2)2 , (4)
where z = ℏkχ/mχc is the relativity parameter
defined in terms of the ADM Fermi momentum
kχ =
 3π2nχ
1/3.
C.
Modified Chaplygin dark fluid EoS
If the Universe is uniformly distributed with a
dark-energy fluid (e.g., a Chaplygin-like gas), neu-
tron stars could contain a dark-energy component
within their cores. Because their extreme internal
conditions can theoretically support dark energy
fluid cores, neutron stars serve as ideal laborato-
ries for probing dark energy. The MCDF EoS is
a compelling candidate for this component, as it
possesses a negative pressure term characteristic
of dark energy alongside a barotropic correction
that ensures hydrostatic stability. Recent work
by Pretel et al. [30] confirmed that neutron stars
with MCDF cores are stable under radial per-
turbations and are consistent with NICER and
GW170817 constraints, justifying further investi-
gation into these configurations using Bayesian
inference. To model this dark energy component,
we employ the MCDF EoS, defined as
PDE(ϵDE) = AϵDE −B
ϵDE
,
(5)
where PDE is the MCDF pressure, ϵDE is the
MCDF energy density, A is a positive dimen-
sionless constant, B is positive constant with
cgs units [g2cm−2s−4]. The first term describes a
barotropic fluid that ensures the dark energy core
can sustain positive pressures, while the second
represents the original Chaplygin gas EoS and


7
produces the negative pressure responsible for
cosmic acceleration.
Modeling a neutron star with a dark energy
core and a baryonic shell requires specifying how
these two distinct, non-mixing fluids meet at their
boundary3. To define an EoS with two distinct
fluids, which do not mix nor occupy the same
spatial region, we construct the stellar interior
using a sharp interface (i.e., the Maxwell construc-
tion) between the two fluids, enforcing pressure
continuity while also permitting a discontinuous
energy density jump. This is the physically ap-
propriate approximation for the non-interacting,
disjoint two-fluid configuration considered here
because the other construction typically used for
first-order phase transitions, namely the Gibbs
construction, requires that the two fluids share
conserved charges and can exchange particles.
These two conditions are not obviously satisfied
when considering a dark energy fluid with no
well-defined particle interpretation4. Thus, un-
der the Maxwell construction, the total neutron
star EoS is given by
P(ϵ) =
(
AϵDE −
B
ϵDE ,
0 ≤r ≤Rdis
PB(ϵB),
Rdis ≤r ≤R,
(6)
where r is the radius coordinate, Rdis is the ra-
dius in which the transition from dark energy
to baryonic matter occurs. Since the pressures
on either side of Rdis must be the same to en-
sure pressure continuity, Eq. 6 implies that the
B parameter can be written as
B = A(ϵ+
dis)2 −ϵ+
disPB(ϵ−
dis),
(7)
where ϵ+
dis is the energy density defining the
boundary of the MCDF core, ϵ−
dis is the energy
density where the baryonic shell begins, PB(ϵ−
dis)
is the baryonic pressure evaluated on the lower
side of the transition. Rather than sampling ϵ+
dis
and ϵ−
dis independently (and enforcing the con-
straint ϵ−
dis ≤ϵ+
dis), we define the energy density
3 See [29–33] for similar treatments of dark energy fluids
inside neutron star cores.
4 See [135, 136] for further details on both the Maxwell
and Gibbs constructions.
jump parameter α = ϵ−
dis/ϵ+
dis ≤1 [30]. This α
parameter reduces the transition into a single
dimensionless quantity that directly character-
izes the strength of the transition from the dark
energy core to the baryonic shell. For a fixed
value of ϵ+
dis, α = 1 and corresponds to a contin-
uous transition with no density jump, while α
close to zero would correspond to a larger energy
density jump. This parameterization is particu-
larly convenient for Bayesian inference because
α ∈(0, 1] is bounded and physically interpretable.
By combining Eq. 5, Eq. 7, and the definition
of the energy density jump variable α, the free
parameters of the MCDF model are A, ϵ+
dis, and
α.
III.
MODELING NEUTRON STAR
PROPERTIES: ADM VS. DARK ENERGY
In order to compute the masses and radii of
neutron stars admixed with ADM, we employ
the two-fluid formalism, which assumes the dom-
inant interaction between the Standard Model
and ADM is gravitational [137]. However, the
global properties of neutron stars with a dark
energy core can be computed by modeling the
transition from the core to the shell using the
Maxwell Construction and solving the traditional
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff (TOV) equations
[31, 32]. In this section, we outline how to com-
pute the mass-radius relation of neutron stars
admixed with ADM as well as stars with cores
comprised of dark energy.
A.
ADM admixed neutron stars and the
two-fluid TOV equations
The mass-radius relation of ADM admixed
neutron stars can be computed by solving the
two-fluid TOV equations, which are a direct con-
sequence of the two-fluid formalism5, and simul-
taneously varying the central densities of ADM
5 Although the choice of the two-fluid formalism is not
fully consistent with the ADM paradigm since it neglects
any non-gravitational interaction between baryonic mat-
ter and ADM, the coupling between the Standard Model
and ADM is expected to be small compared to the cou-
pling of ADM to itself (see Sec. II and Rutherford


8
and baryonic matter given an EoS for both com-
ponents [see 46, 47, 49, 54, 69, 72, 138, and ref-
erences therein]. The two-fluid TOV equations
can derived from the standard single-fluid TOV
equations using the two-fluid formalism. By as-
suming the dominant fluid interaction is grav-
itational, the two-fluid formalism implies that
ADM and baryonic matter each satisfy their
own conservation of energy-momentum equation
(i.e,, ∇µT µν = 0) since. Conservation of energy-
momentum for both ADM and baryonic matter
is equivalent to
P = PB + Pχ
(8)
ϵ = ϵB + ϵχ,
(9)
where P(ϵ) is the total pressure (energy density).
By substituting P and ϵ into the TOV equations,
we have
dPB
dr
= −(ϵB + PB) Gc2M + 4πr3GP
c2r

rc2 −2GM

(10)
dPχ
dr = −
 ϵχ + Pχ
 Gc2M + 4πr3GP
c2r

rc2 −2GM

(11)
dMB
dr
= 4πr2 ϵB
c2
(12)
dMχ
dr
= 4πr2 ϵχ
c2 ,
(13)
where Mχ is the gravitational mass of ADM, MB
is the gravitational mass of baryonic matter, and
M = MB + Mχ. Given the ADM EoS and bary-
onic EoS, the two-fluid TOV equations are nu-
merically integrated radially outward for a range
of pairs of baryonic and ADM central energy den-
sities until one of the fluid pressures reaches zero,
marking either a neutron star with an ADM core
if Pχ = 0, PB̸ = 0 or the baryonic surface of a
et al. [60] for further details). Additionally, since this
work uses the PP EoS of Hebeler et al. [126] to model
the baryonic EoS, the conserved current JB
µ cannot be
computed because the Hebeler et al. [126] model is pa-
rameterized, thus there is no corresponding Lagrangian.
Therefore, since this considers the Hebeler et al. [126]
PP model to capture the uncertainties of the baryonic
EoS and we assume gB ≪gχ, the two-fluid formalism
is an appropriate framework to compute the properties
of ADM admixed neutron stars. However, this can be
improved by using the interacting two-fluid model of
Hajkarim et al. [62], which we leave for future work.
star with an ADM halo if Pχ̸ = 0, PB = 0. Fur-
thermore, the radial values at which Pχ = 0 and
PB = 0 define the ADM radius (Rχ) and Bary-
onic radius (RB), respectively. Thus, the percent
ratio of the total ADM gravitational mass to the
total gravitational mass of the neutron star, i.e.
the ADM mass-fraction, can then be defined as
Fχ =
Mχ(Rχ
Mχ(Rχ) + MB(RB) ∗100.
(14)
Defining Fχ is important to the analysis of
ADM admixed neutron stars because most
ADM accumulation mechanisms, such neutron
bremsstrahlung [47], accretion [50], and neutron
decay to ADM [46], compute the total accumu-
lated ADM mass in terms of a fraction of MNS,
the total neutron star mass. This makes the ADS
mass fraction a physically interesting parameter
to consider. Lastly, in order to compute a desired
Fχ for a given ADM and baryonic matter EoS
using the two-fluid TOV equations, we follow
the approach outlined in Rutherford et al. [56].
The Rutherford et al. [56] numerical algorithm is
implemented in the NEoST v2.2.0 neutron star
EoS inference code [139]6.
B.
Neutron Stars with a dark energy core
To investigate the impact of an MCDF dark
energy core on neutron star observables, and
by extension the mass-radius relation, we model
the compact object as a hybrid star. A hybrid
star is a neutron star comprised of two distinct
regions, which are spatially separated by a sharp
boundary where the constituent fluids do not mix.
Typically, these are neutron star modeled with
a quark core surrounded by a shell of nuclear
matter [see, e.g., 136, 140–142]. However, this
work considers hybrid stars with a dark energy
core described by the MCDF EoS, surrounded
by a baryonic matter shell defined by the high-
density PP EoS model.
This configuration fundamentally differs from
the ADM scenario detailed in Sec. III A. In ADM
admixed neutron stars, the ADM and baryonic
matter co-occupy the same spatial volume and
6 https://github.com/xpsi-group/neost


9
interact primarily through gravity, which necessi-
tates using the two-fluid TOV equations to simul-
taneously solve for their overlapping structure.
On the other hand, since the MCDF core and
baryonic shell in our hybrid star model do not
spatially overlap, and are governed by a sharp
transition from one fluid to the next, the macro-
scopic neutron star structure can be determined
by integrating a single pressure profile.
This
is most clearly shown in Eq. 6. Therefore, the
hybrid neutron star masses and radii can be com-
puted using one central energy density and the
standard single-fluid TOV equations [143, 144].
For a given EoS, the single-fluid TOV equa-
tions are solved by integrating radially outward
until the fluid pressure vanishes. For a hybrid
star defined by the Maxwell construction, such as
that of Eq. 6, the integration of the single-fluid
TOV equations begins with using the first fluid’s
EoS until it is halted at the transition energy den-
sity ϵ+
dis corresponding to Rdis. Then, depending
on the width of the density jump (which is deter-
mined by the parameter α) from the first fluid in
the core to the surrounding shell of the second
fluid, the integration is resumed using the EoS
of the second fluid at the pressure in which the
integration was halted, but at the lower energy
density ϵ−
dis. Integrating across a range of cen-
tral energy densities in this way produces the
full mass-radius relation for these hybrid stellar
configurations.
One consequence of computing a piecewise
transition produced by dark energy cores, but
also the formation of quark matter cores, in the
TOV equations is the generation of two separate
stable mass-radius relations (i.e., “branches”):
a primary branch describing hybrid stars with
an MCDF core and baryonic shell, and a sec-
ondary branch at higher radii consisting of purely
baryonic stars. Mass-radius curves with these
two stable branches can produce neutron stars
with the same masses, but different radii, which
are known as twin stars [see, e.g., 116, 135, 145–
147]. Although such configurations are physically
possible, the secondary branch introduces sig-
nificant computational computational challenges
during the Bayesian inference process. Specif-
ically, because a single neutron star mass can
correspond to multiple radii in the twin star
case, transforming the posteriors across a multi-
valued mass-radius relation is computationally
difficult.
Furthermore, the inference becomes
confounded since the second branch, which in
this context contains purely baryonic matter, re-
mains mathematically defined by a combination
of both the MCDF and PP EoS parameters. As
a result, given these computational challenges,
and because this work focuses specifically on neu-
tron stars containing an MCDF core, we discard
the second branch and leave a more complete
Bayesian analysis of twin stars for future work.
IV.
INFERENCE FRAMEWORK
In this work, we follow the analysis framework
used in Rutherford et al. [56], Rutherford et al.
[60], which is accounts for the possible presence of
an ADM component inside the neutron star inte-
rior, and is implemented in the open-source EoS
inference code NEoST v2.2.0 [139]. To account
for the MCDF EoS model, modifications to the
NEoST code were required, which can be found
in NEoST v3.0.07.
Furthermore, a full repro-
duction package, including the posterior samples
and scripts to generate the data and plots in this
work, will be available in a Zenodo repository at
[148]. Here, we briefly summarize the Ruther-
ford et al. [56] method, outline the modifications
required to account for the MCDF model, and
state all imposed constraints.
To begin, we apply Bayes’ theorem to estab-
lish a posterior distribution on all EoS parameters
with the following form:
p(θ, ϵc|d) ∝p(θ)p(ϵc|θ) p(d|θ, ϵc)
∝p(θ)p(ϵc|θ)p(d|M(θ, ϵc), R(θ, ϵc)),
(15)
where θ is the vector containing all EoS param-
eters, ϵc is the vector containing the central en-
ergy densities, d is the vector containing the
7 NEoST v3.0.0
is
currently
an
unofficially
re-
leased
version
of
NEoST,
thus
please
see
the
Dark Energy Adaptation
GitHub
branch
at
https://github.com/xpsi-group/neost/tree/
Dark_Energy_Adaptation.


10
masses and radii of the sources from each sce-
nario, M(θ, ϵc) is the mass of a produced neutron
star, and R(θ, ϵc) is the radius. Here, we sample
over Fχ for ADM admixed neutron stars because
the ADM mass-fraction is a function of central en-
ergy densities of both baryonic matter and ADM.
Thus, we define Fχ = Fχ(θ, ϵc,B, ϵc,ADM), and
we can write
p(θ, ϵc,B, Fχ|d) ∝p(θ)p(ϵc,B|θ)p(Fχ|θ, ϵc)
p(d|M, R),
(16)
where ϵc,B and ϵc,ADM are the central energy
densities of baryonic matter and ADM, respec-
tively.
Next, if we assume that each of the data
sources are independent of one another and
equate the likelihood to the PPM-derived mass-
radius posteriors, Eq. 16 becomes
p(θ, ϵc,B, Fχ|d) ∝p(θ)p(ϵc,B|θ)p(Fχ|θ, ϵc)
Y
i
p(Mi, Ri | dPPM,i), (17)
where dPPM,i is the mass-radius data derived
from PPM and i runs over the number of stars
for which PPM delivers the mass and radius.
Here, p(Mi, Ri | dPPM,i) is estimated by apply-
ing a Gaussian kernel density estimate to the
NICER PPM derived mass-radius data. The pos-
terior distribution p(θ, ϵc,B, Fχ|d) is determined
using the nested sampling software MULTINEST
[149–151], where the prior is formed by draw-
ing samples from the prior distribution on the
EoS parameters to compute the corresponding M
and R, and the likelihood is calculated using the
KDE of p(Mi, Ri | dPPM,i). Lastly, our frame-
work neglects ADM halo configurations, which
have been shown to modify the exterior space-
time of neutron stars and thus necessitate the
modification of the PPM analysis pipeline used
by NICER [see 53, 64, 74]. To ensure that only
ADM core configurations are computed in both
the priors and resulting posteriors, we assign all
halo configurations to have a zero likelihood.
Finally, to infer the properties of neutron stars
with a MCDF core, and by extension the com-
bined dark energy and baryonic EoS, the pos-
terior distribution is modified in the following
way
p(θ, ϵc|d) ∝p(θ)p(ϵc|θ)
Y
i
p(Mi, Ri | dPPM,i).
(18)
The treatment of the central energy density
differs between the ADM admixed neutron star
model and the MCDF one is due to the difference
in how we model their physical structures. In the
ADM framework, the central energy density is
defined by a vector of densities ϵc = (ϵb, ϵADM),
accounting for both the baryonic and ADM com-
ponents. The MCDF model, however, assumes a
dark energy core surrounded by a baryonic mat-
ter shell, which constrains the system to a single
central energy density, ϵc, for a given set of EoS
parameters θ. Additionally, to make this work
comparable to Pretel et al. [31] and since the
dark energy mass fraction inside neutron stars is
unconstrained, the Bayesian framework with the
MCDF EoS accounted for is identical to the one
considering baryonic matter.
To ensure that no twin stars are formed, we
impose that the central energy density satisfies
ϵc > ϵ+. In addition, for all EoSs considered in
this work, all priors and posteriors are computed
with the constraint Mi ≥1 M⊙. The constraint
Mi ≥1 M⊙is chosen to be consistent with the X-
ray Pulse Simulation and Inference [X-PSI; 152]
PPM analysis pipeline, which was used to derive
the NICER mass-radius posteriors considered
in this study (see Sec. V D for further details).
Furthermore, the 1 M⊙constraint is motivated
by the theoretical description of neutron stars
early in their evolution [153].
This minimum
neutron star mass constraint is also in agreement
with core-collapse supernova simulations [see e.g.,
154, 155].
V.
EOS PRIORS & SOURCE SELECTION
In this section, we define the prior parameter
ranges for the baryonic EoS, the bosonic and
fermionic Nelson et al. [47] ADM models, and
the MCDF model. In addition, we discuss the
astrophysical data sets used for our analysis.


11
A.
PP model priors
As discussed in Sec. II A, we model the bary-
onic EoS using the PP model and Keller et al.
[127] N3LO χEFT calculations up to 1.5n0. Here,
the N3LO χEFT band best-fit polytropic pa-
rameters discussed in Sec. II A are used as the
prior ranges on the baryonic EoS for densities
between [0.572n0, 1.5n0]. To generate the PP
model above 1.5n0, the prior ranges for the three
polytropic indices are varied in the ranges of
Γ1 ∈[0, 8], Γ2 ∈[0, 8], Γ3 ∈[0.5, 8], where the
transition densities between the first to second
polytrope (n1) and the second to the third (n2)
are varied within 2.0n0 ≤n1 ≤n2 ≤8.3n0 [see
115, for further details]. Furthermore, the first
polytrope is used from 1.5n0 to n1, the second
is used from n1 to n2, and the third from n2 to
the maximum central density allowed by causal-
ity. Lastly, we note that the PP model allows
for first-order phase transitions with Γ2 = 0 [see
107, 126, 131].
B.
Bosonic & fermionic ADM priors
We now define the prior spaces for the
fermionic and bosonic ADM parameters.
For
both ADM models, we define the priors on mχ,
gχ/mϕ, and Fχ, all three of which fully charac-
terize the Nelson et al. [47] ADM model.
The prior ranges on the ADM self-repulsion
strengths and particle masses are given by
gχ
mϕ/MeV ∈
(
[10−2, 103],
Bosonic ADM
[10−5, 103], Fermionic ADM
(19)
mχ/MeV ∈
(
[10−2, 108],
Bosonic ADM
[10−2, 109], Fermionic ADM,
(20)
respectively. For bosonic ADM, the lower and up-
per bounds on gχ/mϕ were chosen to capture the
values used by Nelson et al. [47] and ensure the
prior space has a finite size. The bounds on the
bosonic mχ prior were chosen such that no ADM
particles could reach velocities larger than the
escape velocity of a typical 1.4 M⊙neutron star
and to evade black hole formation from bosonic
ADM core collapse for the lower and upper limits,
respectively [see 56, and references therein].
For fermionic ADM, the lower bound on the
gχ/mϕ prior is set by an approximation for
gχ/mϕ = 0 MeV−1, which is physically allowed
due to the ADM fermionic degeneracy pressure,
in order to satisfy our previous assumption of
gB ≪gχ [for details see 60]. The upper bound on
the fermionic gχ/mϕ is again set by the largest
values used in Nelson et al. [47] to keep the prior
space bounded above. For the fermionic ADM
mχ priors, the bounds are set by the same phys-
ical limits used for the bosonic case, however,
due to the fermionic ADM degeneracy pressure,
fermionic ADM cores can support mχ ≤109 MeV
before gravitational collapse [156].
The final ADM parameter for both of our
ADM models is Fχ, which, unlike the ADM par-
ticle mass, is not well constrained. Our previ-
ous works [56, 60] have discussed in detail the
possible accumulation mechanisms, such as neu-
tron bremsstrahlung [47], neutron decay to ADM
[46], and accretion of ADM from the local den-
sity onto neutron stars [50], in order to demon-
strate the possible constraints on the ADM pa-
rameter space. However, two of the objectives
of this work are to compare the inferences of
ADM core to dark energy cores and to investi-
gate how the ADM inferences change compared
to our prior work on both models. Therefore,
to illustrate the impact of a large ADM mass-
fraction on neutron star inferences, while remain-
ing consistent with the values and accumulation
scenarios motivated in the current literature on
dark matter admixed neutron stars [see, e.g.,
46, 52, 53, 59, 63, 64, 66, 71, 74, 157, 158], we
take the upper bound on the prior, for both
fermionic and bosonic ADM, to be
Fχ ≤5%.
(21)
C.
MCDF EoS priors
To generate the MCDF EoS, the prior inter-
vals on the free parameters of the model must
be defined. In particular, we use the works of
[28, 30–32, and references therein] and any known


12
physical constraints to define the priors on A, ϵ+
dis,
and α.
First, we consider the prior interval of the
density jump parameter α.
The upper prior
bound on α is directly determined by its defi-
nition, which is stated in Sec. II C. We therefore
take an upper prior bound of α ≤1. For the
lower bound, we require α̸ = 0 because if α = 0,
the neutron star would be comprised entirely of
dark energy, making the star undetectable by
NICER. We thus take the lower bound on the
density jump parameter to be α ≥0.1 to ensure
that the stars are visible by NICER and to cap-
ture the values considered in Pretel [28], Pretel
et al. [30], Pretel et al. [32].
Next, we define the priors on ϵ+
dis. Around
the fiducial density of 1.5n0, which corresponds
to about 1014.60 g/cm3, the Keller et al. [127]
N3LO χEFT band imposes tight constraints on
the baryonic EoS. To ensure that we consider
neutron stars with baryonic shells extending to
densities at least up to the maximum density in
which we choose to trust χEFT, we impose that
log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) ≥14.60. The upper bound is
simply set by the maximum central energy den-
sity reached in a neutron star for a sampled EoS,
which can reach values as high as 1016 g/cm3.
Combining the constraints imposed by χEFT
and the maximum central density gives
14.60 ≤log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) ≤16.
(22)
However, as mentioned in Sec. IV, we also im-
pose the constraint ϵ+
dis < ϵc, which ensures that
only neutron stars with dark energy cores are
produced, thus the upper bound on the prior will
shift depending on the sampled ϵc.
The final free parameter of the MCDF EoS
model is the dimensionless proportionality con-
stant of the barotropic pressure term, A, which
has been shown to result in appreciable changes
in the mass-radius relation for values in the
range [0.2, 0.7] [31]. For example, Pretel et al.
[31] showed that the maximum mass of a mass-
radius curve can increase by about 20% from
A = 0.2 to A = 0.3.
However, we find that
neutron stars with masses greater than our im-
posed 1 M⊙constraint can be produced down
to A ≈0.1. For instance, an EoS defined by
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
R [km]
1.0
1.4
1.8
2.2
M [M⊙]
J0437
J0030
J0740
FIG. 1: The 68% (darker shaded region) and
95% (lighter shaded region) confidence regions
of the mass-radius posteriors of PSR J0740 [85],
PSR J0030 [91], and PSR J0437[93].
A = 0.1, α = 0.9, and log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.62,
can produce neutron stars with masses up to
1.2 M⊙. Therefore, we take the prior interval to
be
A ∈[0.1, 0.7].
(23)
Furthermore, we update the priors on A to ensure
the speed of sound within the MCDF core is
causal. Thus, for each sampled EoS, we impose
the constraint
v2
s,MCDF
c2
= dPDE
dϵDE
= A + B
ϵ2
DE
≤1,
(24)
where vs,MCDF is the speed of sound within the
MCDF core.
D.
Astrophysical data sets
In our Bayesian framework, we incorpo-
rate the following NICER mass-radius posteri-
ors for three millisecond pulsars: PSR J0740,
PSR J0030, and PSR J0437. For PSR J0740,
we use the Salmi et al. [85] posteriors (M =
2.07 ± 0.07 M⊙, R = 12.49+1.28
−0.88 km at the 68%


13
confidence level), which benefit from an im-
proved background treatment over earlier anal-
yses.
For PSR J0030, we adopt the ST+PDT
hot spot model from Vinciguerra et al. [91],
yielding M = 1.40+0.13
−0.12 M⊙and R = 11.71+0.88
−0.83
km8.
Lastly, for PSR J0437, we include the
posteriors reported in Choudhury et al. [93]
(M = 1.42±0.04 M⊙, R = 11.36+0.95
−0.63 km), which
account for the 2017–2021 NICER data set. The
joint M −R posteriors on these three sources
make up the astrophysical data considered in
this work.
VI.
RESULTS: IMPACT OF MCDF &
ADM CORES
In this section, we investigate the inferred im-
pacts of bosonic and fermionic ADM cores, and
MCDF cores relative to the posterior inferences
on the PP model.
We first analyze the prior
distributions for all four stellar models to un-
derstand the overall impact of considering the
possibilities of ADM and MCDF cores inside
neutron star interiors. Next, we analyze the pos-
terior inferences for our four models to study
the impact each has on the inferred the dense
matter EoS and neutron star properties. We also
investigate the posteriors of our models for the
radii of 2 M⊙(R2.0) and 1.4 M⊙(R1.4) neutron
stars. Lastly, we show the promise of constraining
the MCDF EoS parameters, A, ϵ+
dis and α, using
NICER mass-radius results. While the bosonic
and fermionic ADM EoS models have been exten-
sively investigated in our prior work [56, 60], the
analysis presented here incorporates additional
observational constraints from PSR J0437−4715,
resulting in updated limits on the ADM parame-
ter space. Thus, the full posterior distribution for
the bosonic and fermionic ADM EoS parameters
are provided for completeness in Appendix A.
8 A recent paper by Kini et al. [92] updates this analysis,
using a larger NICER data set together with XMM data
and improved sampler settings. However, the results
found in the new study are compatible with the results
that we use from Vinciguerra et al. [91].
A.
Prior distributions
Implementing
the
MCDF,
bosonic
and
fermionic ADM, and PP equations of state gen-
erate the prior distributions shown in Fig. 2. In
particular, Fig. 2 shows, for each neutron star
model, the prior distribution of the total com-
bined EoS priors (top left panel), the resulting
mass-radius priors (top right panel), and the
isolated baryonic EoS (bottom panel). To iso-
late the effects of both ADM models and the
MCDF model, respectively, on the PP EoS a
priori, the dark sector component was neglected
and only the PP EoS pressure was computed for
each EoS parameter vector sample from the com-
bined “Bosonic ADM + PP EoS”, “Fermionic
ADM + PP EoS”, and “MCDF + PP EoS” priors.
This results in the “Neglecting Bosonic ADM”,
“Neglecting Fermionic ADM”, and “Neglecting
MCDF” bands in the top left panels of Fig. 2,
which can be understood as the prior distribu-
tions for the PP EoS when the dark sector com-
ponents are neglected. When the bosonic and
fermionic ADM components are neglected, the
95% CI of the baryonic EoS remains mostly un-
changed, with the lower end of the 95% CI band
shifting slightly to higher pressures. Moreover,
both the ‘Neglecting Bosonic ADM’ and ‘Ne-
glecting Fermionic ADM’ bands are identical to
one another, indicating that neither fermionic
nor bosonic ADM cores significantly affect the
baryonic EoS.
On the other hand, when MCDF cores are
neglected, the resulting baryonic EoS shifts and
broadens towards lower pressures, and as a re-
sult, softer EoSs. The softening of the isolated
baryonic EoS results from our construction of
neutron stars with an MCDF core. By modeling
the stellar interior with a sharp interface sep-
arating the MCDF core from the surrounding
baryonic shell, the baryonic EoS is required to
match the MCDF EoS at this boundary. Since
the interface occurs at a lower pressure than in
the center of the star, this matching condition
inherently selects softer EoS configurations in the
prior. Stiffer baryonic EoS configurations require
a higher pressure crossing with the MCDF EoS,
which falls outside the physically viable MCDF
parameter space for the selected prior ranges.


14
14.4
14.6
14.8
15.0
15.2
log10(ϵ) [g/cm3]
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
log10(P) [dyn/cm2]
Bosonic ADM + PP EoS
Fermionic ADM + PP EoS
MCDF + PP EoS
PP EoS
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
R [km]
1.0
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3.0
M [M⊙]
14.4
14.6
14.8
15.0
15.2
log10(ϵ) [g/cm3]
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
log10(P) [dyn/cm2]
Neglecting Bosonic ADM
Neglecting Fermionic ADM
Neglecting MCDF
FIG. 2: Pressure-energy density prior distributions for the total combined dense matter EoS (top
left), the resulting mass-radius prior distributions (top right), and the isolated baryonic EoS
component (bottom. For the bottom panel, the contours are generated by extracting and plotting
only the PP EoS pressure from the prior samples of each respective combined model. Across all
panels, the light (dark) green bands represent the 68% (95%) CIs of the purely baryonic PP model.
The purple dashed lines represent the 95% prior of neutron stars with a possible bosonic ADM
core, the light blue dotted lines represent the 95% prior for a fermionic ADM core, and the orange
dashed-dotted lines are the 95% prior for stars with a MCDF core. Comparing the top left and
bottom panels shows that, while the isolated baryonic pressures remain relatively unchanged when
both bosonic and fermionic ADM are neglected, the total combined EoS pressure-energy density
priors broaden significantly at lower densities when ADM is accounted for. On the other hand,
including MCDF cores tends to push the isolated baryonic EoS towards lower pressures, whereas
the total combined EoS pressure-energy density priors broaden towards lower pressures. In the top
right panel, we see the low-density pressure modification from the ADM cores favors lower
maximum masses for the ADM admixed models, whereas the MCDF core priors significantly
broaden toward higher masses at the 95% level.
For the total combined pressure-energy den-
sity prior, Fig. 2 shows that the presence of
fermionic and bosonic ADM broadens the 95%
CI of the total neutron star EoS at densities
below ∼1014.65 g/cm3. The inclusion of ADM
cores broadens the 95% credible region of the
total combined EoS towards higher pressures
at densities below ∼1014.65 g/cm3 because the


15
ADM pressures are comparable to or greater than
those of the PP model in this density regime.
Beyond this density, the dominant pressure is
provided by the PP model9.
Quantitatively,
at log10(ϵ cm3/g) = 14.4, the upper limits of
the 95% CI of the total log-pressure priors for
bosonic ADM, fermionic ADM, and the PP mod-
els are 33.93, 33.94, 33.59, respectively. However,
at log10(ϵ cm3/g) = 14.7, we calculate that the
95% CI upper limit of the total log-pressure pri-
ors are 33.35, 33.39, and 34.71 for the bosonic
ADM, fermionic ADM, and PP models, respec-
tively. This shows that ADM cores contribute the
dominant pressure at densities <∼1014.65 g/cm3,
but contribute negligibly to pressures above this
density. From the observation that both ADM-
admixed models broaden the 95% CI of the
total combined neutron star EoS at densities
<∼1014.65 g/cm3, but minimally deviate from the
95% prior of the PP model at higher densities, we
conclude that ADM cores widen the total dense
matter EoS uncertainties at low density without
impacting the EoS above these densities a priori.
In mass-radius space, Fig. 2 shows that
the ADM admixed priors of both bosonic and
fermionic ADM favor slightly lower maximum
masses, but are otherwise very consistent with
the PP model. This consistency with the PP
model mass-radius priors is due to a strong de-
generacy between the ADM EoS and PP model
parameters. That is, a soft baryonic EoS can
produce neutron stars identical to that of a rela-
tively stiff baryonic EoS with an ADM core. As
a result, we find that, under the current uncer-
tainties of the baryonic EoS, ADM cores soften
the overall neutron star EoS by favoring lower
maximum masses. Finally, the prior distributions
for bosonic and fermionic ADM are identical to
each other in both panels of Fig. 2, suggesting
9 We note that the total pressure is computed by summing
the pressures from ADM and the baryonic EoS. More
specifically, for the PP model, pressures are computed
for each ϵ up to the maximum central baryonic density
(ϵmax c,B) of the sampled PP EoS. For each sampled
ADM EoS model, the ADM pressures are computed up
to the maximum central ADM density corresponding to
the sampled Fχ and ϵmax c,B. For the MCDF core neu-
tron stars, however, the total pressure for the combined
EoS is determined by computing pressures using the
MCDF EoS for ϵ ≥ϵ+
dis and the PP EoS for ϵ < ϵ+
dis.
that both ADM models affect the EOS in similar
ways and, as a result, produce identical neutron
stars.
However, when considering neutron stars with
MCDF cores and baryonic shells, Fig. 2 shows
that the total combined EoS prior, and by exten-
sion the corresponding mass-radius prior, signifi-
cantly widens the 95% CI towards lower pressure,
compared to the PP and ADM admixed mod-
els. Including MCDF cores broadens the total
EoS and mass-radius prior because, within our
model, neutron stars are entirely described by
the MCDF EoS within their cores, providing the
sole source of pressure within this regime up to
the transition density, ϵ+
dis. Therefore, the com-
bined neutron star pressure-energy density priors
will be dominated by the uncertainties of ϵ+
dis
in the MCDF model, which happens just above
1014.6 g/cm3. Since the pressure-energy density
priors significantly broaden and the mass-radius
priors tend toward larger masses, we conclude
that the possible presence of MCDF cores inside
neutron stars can greatly alter the total dense
matter EoS and neutron star observables.
B.
Inferred neutron star properties
Fig. 3 shows the posterior distributions of
the total combined EoS in the pressure-energy
density space(top left panel), their correspond-
ing mass-radius relation (top right panel), and
the extracted baryonic EoS (bottom panel), for
the PP model (dark and light green contours),
stars admixed with fermionic and bosonic ADM
cores (dotted blue and dashed purple lines, re-
spectively), and stars with a MCDF core (or-
ange dashed-dotted lines) in the top left and
right panels, respectively. For the MCDF model,
the top left panel of Fig. 3 shows that the total
pressure-energy density posteriors widen at the
95% level for intermediate densities in the range
between about 1014.6 g/cm3 and 1015 g/cm3, with
the most substantial broadening occurring just
above 1014.7 g/cm3. Interestingly, the posteriors
on ϵ+
dis peak near 1014.74 g/cm3 and span a simi-
lar density range to the pressure-energy density
posteriors (see Sec. VI C for details), suggest-
ing that the neutron star EoS, and by extension


16
14.4
14.6
14.8
15.0
15.2
log10(ϵ) [g/cm3]
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
log10(P) [dyn/cm2]
Bosonic ADM + PP EoS
Fermionic ADM + PP EoS
MCDF + PP EoS
PP EoS
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
R [km]
1.0
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3.0
M [M⊙]
14.4
14.6
14.8
15.0
15.2
log10(ϵ) [g/cm3]
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
log10(P) [dyn/cm2]
Neglecting Bosonic ADM
Neglecting Fermionic ADM
Neglecting MCDF
FIG. 3: Pressure-energy density posterior distributions for,the total combined dense matter EoS
(top left), the total combined mass-radius (top right), and the isolated baryonic EoS (bottom)
posterior distributions. The contour intervals and corresponding colors for each stellar model are
the same as in Fig. 2. In all three panels, the MCDF core posteriors are significantly wider than
those of the PP model and broaden the 95% CI of the isolated baryonic EoS towards lower
pressures at high density. Furthermore, the MCDF core neutron star model predicts the mean
maximum mass to be 2.29 M⊙. However, the total combined EoS posteriors of the ADM admixed
models broaden at lower density and predict lower maximum masses for the total combined EoS
(with a mean of 2.12 M⊙), but do not change the posterior on the isolated baryonic EoS (which
maintains a mean maximum mass of 2.16 M⊙). The 95% CI of the maximum mass of all 4 models
is given in Table. I.
the mass-radius relation, is particularly sensitive
to the density of ϵ+
dis within our disjoint, non-
interacting two-fluid model. A sensitivity to the
transition density ϵ+
dis would broaden not only
the pressure-energy density posteriors, but also
the mass-radius posteriors.
To illustrate this sensitivity,10, the maximum
10 We note that all illustrative calculations, namely the
mass and radius of a neutron star mass-radius
relation with a MCDF core described by A =
0.3, α = 0.6, and log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.68,
is 2.18 M⊙and 12.02 km, respectively.
How-
ever, if we consider the same EoS but with
one mentioned here and the two described in Sec. VI C,
consider the PP model described by following fixed
parameters: Γ1 = 5, Γ2 = 4, Γ3 = 2.6, n1 = 1.8n0,
n2 = 4n0, KχEFT = 2.7, and ΓχEFT = 2.624.


17
10
11
12
13
14
R1.4 [km]
10
11
12
13
14
15
R2.0 [km]
MCDF + PP EoS
Bosonic ADM + PP EoS
Fermionic ADM + PP EoS
PP EoS
FIG. 4: Posterior correlation between the radius
of a 2 M⊙(R2.0) and 1.4 M⊙(R1.4) neutron star
for the PP model (light and dark green bands),
bosonic ADM model (dashed purple), fermionic
ADM model (blue dotted), and MCDF core
model (dashed-dotted orange). The contour
levels are the same as in Fig. 2. The solid gray
lines represents the R2.0 = R1.4 line. We find
that the ADM admixed posteriors strongly
overlap with the PP model, but the MCDF core
posteriors widen along both the R2.0 and R1.4
axes, respectively.
log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.61, the maximum mass
and corresponding radius increase to 2.35 M⊙and
12.84 km, respectively. Furthermore, because the
log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) posteriors favor densities just
above the χEFT transition density of 14.6, the
resulting neutron stars will be composed of very
large MCDF cores, which produce substantially
higher masses than their purely baryonic coun-
terparts.
In the mass-radius space, this broadening of
the total combined pressure-energy posteriors
translates into broader radii and much larger
maximum masses at the 95% CI when com-
pared to both the PP model and the ADM ad-
mixed models. Outside of the density range of
log10(ϵ cm3/g) ∈[14.6, 15.0], the MCDF model
infers pressures similar to pressures of the PP
model, thus showing the overall consistency be-
tween the two models. Since the MCDF model
mass-radius and pressure-energy density poste-
riors strongly overlap with the PP model, but
noticeably wider, we conclude that neutron stars
with MCDF cores are equally as consistent with
the NICER data as the PP model, but predict
substantially more massive neutron stars.
To better understand how the MCDF core
influences the posterior distribution on the bary-
onic EoS, the pressure-energy density relation in
which the MCDF core is neglected. As shown in
the bottom panel of Fig. 3, isolating the bary-
onic EoS pressure shows the “Neglecting MCDF”
95% CI extends preferentially towards lower pres-
sures. The lower bound of “Neglecting MCDF”
band encompasses a wider range of lower pres-
sure values for the same reasons as observed in
the prior: the baryonic EoS pressure must match
the MCDF EoS pressure at ϵ+
dis. Since the in-
terface at ϵ+
dis occurs at a lower pressure than in
the center of the star, the matching condition in-
herently selects softer EoSs. However, compared
to the prior distribution which also includes a
broad range of softer baryonic EOSs, the bary-
onic EoS component of the posterior distribution
prefers stiffer EOSs to support heavy-mass pul-
sars, namely that of PSR J0740. Therefore, the
“Neglecting MCDF” posterior’s expansion into the
low-pressure regime is not as low as that of the
prior.
In contrast to the pronounced shifts result-
ing from the MCDF model, the ADM admixed
core models exhibit more subtle deviations from
the purely baryonic baseline of the PP EoS.
Fig. 3 shows that the 95% level pressure-energy
density posteriors broaden at densities below
about 1014.75 g/cm3, but otherwise predict pres-
sures similar to the PP model. As mentioned in
Sec. VI A, this broadening results in lower maxi-
mum masses, but nearly identical radii to the PP
model. Compared to their respective pressure-
energy density prior, the ADM admixed model
posteriors predict nearly identical pressures at
the 95% CI for densities <∼1014.75 g/cm3. Fur-
thermore, the bottom panel of Fig. 3 shows that
the both ADM models do not affect the posteriors
of the baryonic EoS. From these observations, we
find that, under the current uncertainties of the
cold dense matter EoS, ADM admixed neutron
stars are indistinguishable from baryonic neutron
stars and that ADM core pressures cannot be
constrained using the mass-radius measurements
of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, and PSR J0437.
Having evaluated the posteriors of all four


18
A = 0.40+0.08
−0.08
14.8
15.2
15.6
16.0
log10(ε+
dis)
log10(ε+
dis) = 14.74+0.09
−0.07
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
A
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
α
14.8
15.2
15.6
16.0
log10(ε+
dis)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
α
α = 0.55+0.31
−0.30
MCDF Posterior
MCDF Prior
FIG. 5: Posterior (solid orange) and prior (dashed blue) corner plot of the MCDF EoS. The free
parameters of the MCDF model, namely A, α, ϵ+
dis, are plotted against each other. The contour
lines in the 2-D contour plots represent the 68% and 95% confidence regions. Along the diagonal,
we show the 1-D histograms of each individual parameter, where the titles show the median value
with the 1σ uncertainties. Here, we see that the posterior distributions of A, ϵ+
dis, their
combinations, and those with α, are narrowed compared to their corresponding priors.
models in the pressure-energy density and mass-
radius spaces, respectively, we now examine their
specific radius correlations to probe the high-
density stiffness of the EoS. Fig. 4 shows the
joint posterior distribution on R2.0 and R1.4 for
all four stellar models. Investigating R2.0 and
R1.4, and by extension ∆R = R2.0−R1.4, can pro-
vide insight into the stiffness of the EoS at high
densities [see 159]. More specifically, Drischler
et al. [159] showed that ∆R > 0(∆R < 0), could
be an indicator that the EoS stiffens (softens)
at high densities. Here, Fig. 4 and Table I show
that all mean values are consistent with ∆R being
positive with the MCDF Model being the most
positive11. Compared to both the PP and ADM
admixed models, the MCDF model widens the
95% CI towards larger R2.0 and smaller R1.4, lead-
ing to ∆R being more positive. The inferred ∆R
values of the MCDF core model are the most posi-
tive because the chosen MCDF core and baryonic
shell contain a strong first-order phase transition,
11 At first glance, the PP model ∆R posteriors appear to
be in contrast with the values inferred in Rutherford
et al. [115]. However, the posterior ∆R values were
inferred using the additional posteriors of GW170817
[124], and GW190425 [125]. Both of these jointly push
the inferred ∆R to smaller values than the one quoted
in this work.


19
characterized by an abrupt transition density in
the piecewise stellar EoS. Therefore, the resulting
total EoS will have an abrupt change in overall
stiffness when transitioning from the MCDF EoS
to the baryonic EoS, which in turn changes the
overall stiffness of the mass-radius relation and
thus ∆R. Although all of the stellar models fa-
vor mean ∆R values being positive, no conclusive
statements on the stiffness of the neutron star
EoS at high densities can be made due to the
broad uncertainties.
C.
Constraints on the MCDF EoS
parameter space
In Fig. 5, we show a corner plot of the poste-
rior (solid orange) and prior (dashed blue) dis-
tributions on the MCDF EoS parameters, A, α,
and ϵ+
dis. Fig. 5 shows that the MCDF poste-
riors of A and ϵ+
dis are narrowed compared to
their respective priors. In particular, the ϵ+
dis
1-D posterior is centered at the same density as
the prior, but strongly favors densities in the
range log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) ∈[14.55, 15]. In addition,
this range strongly overlaps with the broadening
of the pressure-energy density posteriors of the
MCDF model in Fig. 3, further demonstrating
that the total neutron star EoS is highly sensitive
to the value of ϵ+
dis. For the A parameter, the
1-D posterior is also centered near the median
value of A = 0.40 and disfavors A <∼0.22. To
illustrate why these values of log10(ϵ+
dis) and A
are disfavored, we consider representative MCDF-
cored neutron star models. A fiducial model with
A = 0.3, α = 0.6, and log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.73
produces MTOV = 2.062 M⊙, while reducing A
to 0.22 or increasing log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) to 15.03
yields maximum masses of only 1.71 M⊙and
1.68 M⊙, respectively. These reduced maximum
masses are inconsistent with the observed mass
measurement of PSR J0740, thereby disfavoring
these parameter regimes.
In contrast to the stringent constraints on A
and ϵ+
dis, Fig. 5 shows that the 1-D posterior of
the density jump parameter is flat relative to
the prior and thus does not disfavor any par-
ticular value.
It is physically reasonable why
no particular α value is inherently disfavored
because the choice of density jump parameter
changes the mass-radius relation by percentages
smaller than than the uncertainties of the NICER
measurements of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, and
PSR J0437. For instance, consider two mass-
radius curves, each described by A = 0.3 and
log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.73, but with α = 0.2
and α = 0.9, respectively. Both MCDF mod-
els generate similar masses, with the α = 0.2
and α = 0.9 models reaching maximum masses
of 2.035 M⊙and 2.16 M⊙, respectively. When
comparing their respective radii for masses in the
interval [1 M⊙, 2 M⊙], we find that the average
relative radial percent difference between these
mass-radius curves is 13.07%, while the NICER
measurements have uncertainties at the 10% level.
The observation that the posteriors of both A and
ϵ+
dis are substantially narrowed compared to their
priors, while α is not, demonstrates that neu-
tron star mass-radius measurements can tightly
constrain the barotropic fluid constant and tran-
sition density of the MCDF EoS, even though the
density jump parameter remains unconstrained.
Moreover, under the current uncertainties of the
baryonic EoS, these observations also show that
NICER can more tightly constrain dark energy
cores than ADM cores.
VII.
SUMMARY & CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have explored the inferred
constraints on the dense matter EoS using four
different neutron star models, namely stars com-
prised of purely baryonic matter, an admixture
of baryonic matter and fermionic ADM cores,
an admixture of baryonic matter and bosonic
ADM cores, and a dark energy core with a bary-
onic shell. Here we have modeled the baryonic
EoS using the Keller et al. [127] χEFT calcula-
tions up to 1.5n0 and Hebeler et al. [126] PP
model at higher densities, both fermionic and
bosonic ADM cores using the Nelson et al. [47]
ADM model, and the dark energy core using the
MCDF model considered in Pretel et al. [31]. To
this end, we employed Bayesian parameter esti-
mation on all four neutron star models using an
adaptation of the NEoST v2.2.0 inference code
and considered the derived NICER mass-radius


20
measurements of PSR J0740, PSR J0030, and
PSR J0437 reported by Salmi et al. [85], Vin-
ciguerra et al. [91], and Choudhury et al. [93],
respectively. By using four different neutron star
models and the NICER data of all three neutron
stars, we inferred the effects of ADM cores and
MCDF cores on neutron star observables and
the promise of constraining the MCDF model
parameter space. In Table I, we summarize the
posterior results on MTOV, R2.0, R1.4, and ∆R.
For neutron stars admixed with either bosonic
or fermionic ADM cores, we find that the
pressure-energy density 95% CI priors of both
models significantly broaden toward higher pres-
sures at densities below ≈1014.65 g/cm3 com-
pared to the PP and MCDF models.
Above
this density, both ADM admixed pressure-energy
density priors are nearly identical to the 95%
CI priors of the PP model.
The total ADM
pressure priors tend toward higher values at den-
sities below ≈1014.65 g/cm3 because the ADM
core pressures in this regime exceed those of the
PP model. At densities above 1014.65 g/cm3, PP
model pressures increase more rapidly than those
of either ADM core model, causing the priors to
converge toward the PP model pressures.
Converting the bosonic and fermionic ADM
priors to the mass-radius plane, we find that
including the possible presence of ADM cores
reduces the prior maximum mass by ≈0.1 M⊙
and strongly overlaps with the PP model priors
at the 95% CI. Accounting for ADM cores inside
neutron star interiors reduces the maximum mass
priors compared to the PP model because ADM
cores decrease the masses and radii of neutron
stars relative to identical stars with the same
baryonic central energy density, thus shifting the
ADM admixed mass-radius priors toward lower
maximum masses. However, the entire ADM ad-
mixed mass-radius prior does not shift to lower
radii due to the degeneracy between the baryonic
and ADM EoSs, which implies that a stiff ADM
EoS with a relatively soft baryonic EoS can gen-
erate similar mass-radius relations. These results
show that the presence of ADM cores, whether
bosonic or fermionic, relaxes the total neutron
star EoS prior uncertainties at low density and
reduces the prior maximum mass, but otherwise
strongly overlaps with the PP model priors. Thus,
we conclude that ADM cores soften the overall
dense matter EoS and are fully consistent with
stars composed of purely baryonic matter a pri-
ori.
Moreover, since the fermionic and bosonic
ADM priors strongly overlap across the entire
pressure-energy density and mass-radius spaces,
we conclude that both models generate identical
admixed neutron star equations of state. This
demonstrates that fermionic ADM admixed stars
are indistinguishable from bosonic ADM admixed
stars.
Upon applying our Bayesian framework and
using the derived NICER measurements to com-
pute the posteriors, we find that the ADM ad-
mixed pressure-energy density posteriors broaden
at densities below 1014.75 g/cm3 and then con-
verge to the posteriors of the PP model at high
density. In addition, the broadening of the to-
tal pressure-energy posteriors is nearly identical
to that of the priors. Since the ADM admixed
EoS posteriors are identical to their priors for
densities <∼1014.75 g/cm3 and identical to the PP
EoS posteriors at high densities, we find that
the ADM admixed EoS cannot be constrained
by current NICER measurements, suggesting a
possible need for measurements of lower mass
neutron stars to probe this regime. We also find
that the posterior on the isolated baryonic EoS
is unaffected by the presence of ADM cores with
Fχ ≤5%, further supporting that neutron stars
with ADM cores are equally as consistent with
the NICER data as stars composed of purely
baryonic matter.
In the mass-radius space, the ADM admixed
posteriors predict slightly lower maximum masses
and strongly overlap with the PP model at
the 95% CI. In particular, we find the poste-
rior 95% CI on MTOV to be 2.16+0.14
−0.15 M⊙and
2.12+0.16
−0.14 M⊙for the PP model and ADM ad-
mixed models, respectively.
Furthermore, we
find that neutron stars with ADM admixed cores
favor ∆R = R2.0 −R1.4 values nearly identical
to those of the PP model at the 95% CI. From
these observations, we conclude that, similar to
the findings of [60], neutron stars with ADM
cores with Fχ ≤5% are equally consistent with
NICER measurements as neutron stars without
ADM. This implies that, under the current un-


21
TABLE I: Posterior distributions on the maximum mass of a non-rotating neutron star MTOV, the
radius of a 2 M⊙and a 1.4 M⊙neutron star, and their different ∆R = R2.0 −R1.4. The upper and
lower values correspond to the 95% CI of each quantity.
PP model MCDF Model Fermionic ADM Model Bosonic ADM Model
MTOV [M⊙] 2.16+0.14
−0.15
2.29+0.45
−0.3
2.12+0.16
−0.14
2.12+0.16
−0.14
R1.4 [km]
12.26+0.65
−0.62
11.74+0.92
−0.82
12.16+0.64
−0.61
12.16+0.64
−0.62
R2.0 [km]
12.27+0.92
−1.19
12.13+1.10
−1.06
12.09+0.93
−1.05
12.10+0.94
−1.06
∆R [km]
0.02+0.33
−0.74
0.45+0.43
−0.84
0.07+0.37
−0.68
0.05+0.36
−0.67
certainties of the baryonic EoS and for Fχ ≤5%,
ADM admixed neutron stars are indistinguish-
able from purely baryonic neutron stars.
The pressure-energy density and mass-radius
priors of neutron stars with MCDF cores differ
substantially from those with ADM cores and
from the PP model. For the MCDF model pri-
ors, we find that the prior pressures relax at
densities between 1014.6 g/cm3 and 1015.2 g/cm3
at the 95% CI level. In the mass-radius space,
we find that the presence of MCDF cores shifts
the 95% CI toward much higher masses for all
radii. Within our disjoint, non-interacting two-
fluid stellar model of a MCDF core and baryonic
shell, the uncertainty of the neutron star EoS
is dominated by the MCDF EoS parameter un-
certainties, particularly that of ϵ+
dis. Given that
the prior on ϵ+
dis spans the range of the observed
pressure broadening in the pressure-energy den-
sity prior, the total neutron star EoS uncertainty
reflects the prior ranges of the MCDF EoS more
so than that of the PP model, thus broadening
the pressure-energy density 95% credible regions.
From the observation that the pressure-energy
density and mass-radius priors greatly increase
when MCDF cores are accounted for, we conclude
that MCDF cores can significantly alter neutron
star properties.
Converting the MCDF core model priors to
their posteriors, we find that neutron stars with
MCDF cores and the MCDF EoS parameters
producing these cores are tightly constrained by
NICER observations. First, we find that the 1-D
posteriors of ϵ+
dis and A are strongly peaked and
narrower compared to their priors. In particu-
lar, log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) >∼15.0 and A <∼0.22 are
strongly disfavored. However, the transition den-
sity jump parameter α posterior is flat relative
to the prior. Therefore, we conclude that NICER
can tightly constrain ϵ+
dis and A of the MCDF
EoS, while α cannot be constrained.
In the pressure-energy density plane, the pos-
teriors of the MCDF model closely matches the
PP model posteriors, but broadens in the log-
energy density range of [14.6, 15.0]. We also find
that the 95% CI of log10(ϵ+
dis cm3/g) = 14.74+0.18
−0.14,
which roughly spans the density range of this
broadening, similar to the priors but much nar-
rower.
Additionally, when isolating the baryonic
EoS from the MCDF posterior, the “Neglecting
MCDF” band extends toward lower pressures rel-
ative to the PP model at high density, although
less severely than in the prior. This is because
the baryonic EoS posterior favors stiffer configu-
rations needed to support PSR J0740, indicating
that the matching condition at ϵ+
dis continues
to bias the inferred baryonic EoS toward softer
configurations even after folding in the NICER
mass-radius data.
Converting the pressure-energy density re-
lation to mass-radius space, the posteriors fa-
vor substantially larger maximum masses with
MTOV = 2.29+0.45
−0.30 M⊙at the 95% CI level. We
also find that the presence of MCDF cores shifts
the mean posterior value of ∆R to 0.45 km, albeit
with large uncertainties, compared to the poste-
riors of the ADM admixed and PP models. The
shift in the mean value of ∆R, and the posterior
radii more generally, is a direct consequence of
the hybrid stellar model used to construct neu-
tron stars with MCDF cores and baryonic shells.


22
That is, because the disjoint, non-interacting two-
fluid model contains a strong first-order phase
transition from the dark energy core to the bary-
onic shell, the total neutron star mass-radius
curve exhibits a rapid change in stiffness across
the phase transition, thus shifting ∆R toward
higher values. Since neutron stars with MCDF
cores predict substantially larger MTOV and ∆R,
we conclude that stars with MCDF cores can
be fully consistent with neutron star measure-
ments and that NICER can tightly constrain
the corresponding EoS of these stars. Further-
more, the inferred maximum masses suggest that
neutron stars with MCDF cores could offer an
interesting explanation for some of the heaviest
inferred compact object masses, such as that of
PSR J0952−0607 [160] and the 2.6 M⊙compact
object in GW190814 [161].
In conclusion, we have demonstrated an alter-
native approach to constraining possible models
of dark energy using neutron star mass-radius
measurements and Bayesian inference. We have
also shown that ADM cores comprised of bosonic
or fermionic ADM result in identical neutron
stars and that neutron stars admixed with ADM
cores are indistinguishable from purely baryonic
stars for ADM mass-fractions less than 5%, im-
proving on the 1.7% bound set by Rutherford
et al. [60]. Furthermore, we find that NICER
observations can tightly constrain MCDF EoS
parameter space, particularly the transition den-
sity ϵ+
dis and barotropic fluid constant B, while
MCDF cores predict substantially higher maxi-
mum masses that may explain some of the heavi-
est observed compact objects. Additionally, we
find that all four neutron star models have posi-
tive mean values of ∆R = R2.0 −R1.4, with the
MCDF model showing the most pronounced shift
toward stiffening at high density. However, given
the broad uncertainties on ∆R, these results do
not provide a conclusive statement on the high-
density stiffness of the neutron star EoS for these
four models.
Finally, several avenues of future work re-
main open. First, the ADM priors derived in
this work assume ADM exists only in the stel-
lar core.
However, ADM may also form halo
configurations that extend through and beyond
the baryonic surface of a neutron star. In this
scenario, the ADM halo introduces additional
gravitational lensing effects, modifying the X-ray
flux observed by NICER and thus altering the
inferred mass-radius posteriors from the PPM
analysis pipeline. It would therefore be valuable
to assess how the EoS-informed pulse profile mod-
eling pipeline of Hoogkamer et al. [87], which uses
normalizing flows to incorporate the mass-radius
priors of the EoS into the X-PSI PPM frame-
work, is modified when ADM priors that fully
account for both core and halo configurations are
considered. Second, all four neutron star models
considered in this work were computed in the non-
rotating limit. Since PSR J0740, PSR J0030, and
PSR J0437 are millisecond pulsars, re-performing
this Bayesian analysis within a rapidly rotating
(two-fluid) framework represents another interest-
ing direction because Konstantinou [72] showed
that the universal relations governing how mass
and radius changes due to rotation remain largely
unaffected by the presence of DM cores for mass
fractions up to 5%. This suggests that these re-
lations could be employed to extend the present
inference to rotating configurations. However,
when ADM halos are accounted for, the ADM
component can be assumed to be torque-free and
differentially rotating, while the baryonic matter
rotates rigidly [65], introducing structural com-
plexity beyond what the mass-radius universal
relations might be able to capture. Since rotation
systematically shifts mass-radius curves to higher
masses and larger radii, incorporating rotation
into our framework would make our analysis more
physically consistent with the PPM data analy-
sis pipeline and could modify the constraints on
both the MCDF and ADM parameter spaces. Al-
together, this analysis provides a foundation for
future studies, adding to the growing consensus
that Bayesian inference techniques are essential
for disentangling the interactions between the
dark sector and neutron star observables.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Ann Nelson for her foun-
dational work on dark matter admixed neu-
tron
stars
that
made
this
work
possible.
A.L.W. acknowledges support from NWO ENW-


23
log10(mχ/MeV) = 4.58+2.30
−1.63
−4
−2
0
2
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV)
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV) = −0.51+2.30
−2.52
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
log10(mχ/MeV)
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
−4
−2
0
2
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV)
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
Fχ [%] = 1.57+1.92
−1.19
Fermionic ADM Prior
Fermionic ADM Posterior
−9
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV/(mχ/MeV))
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
Fermionic ADM Posterior
FIG. 6: Left panel: Posterior (dotted blue lines) and prior (solid grey lines) distributions of the
fermionic ADM EoS parameters. The contour levels are same as in Fig. 5; Right panel: Probability
density contour plot of the fermionic ADM posteriors in the Fχ-log10

gχ
(mϕ/MeV)/(mχ/MeV)

plane. Note, the contours represent the 1σ (light blue) and 2σ (dark blue) levels for both the prior
and posterior. In the right panel, the posterior ratio of gχ/mχ and mχ grows more narrow for
increasing Fχ at both the 1σ and 2σ contour levels, indicating tight constraints can be imposed on
the ratio if neutron stars have large Fχ near 5%. However, the left panel shows that the individual
fermionic ADM posteriors are nearly identical to their respective priors, showing that they cannot
be constrained.
XL grant OCENW.XL21.XL21.038 Probing the
phase diagram of Quantum Chromodynamics.
C.P.W. acknowledges all the administrative
and facilities staff at the University of New
Hampshire, especially Katie Makem-Boucher
and Michelle Mancini.
The contributions of
C.P.W. and N.R. were supported by NASA grant
No.80NSSC22K0092. The work of C.P.W. and
N.R. were also supported in part by grant NSF
PHY-2309135 to the Kavli Institute for Theoreti-
cal Physics (KITP). N.R. also acknowledges sup-
port from the Foundational Questions Institute
(FQxI) and the University of New Hampshire
Dissertation Fellowship. We acknowledge exten-
sive use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System
(ADS) Bibliographic Services, the INSPIRE-HEP
database, and ArXiv.
Software: Python/C language [162], GNU Sci-
entific
Library
[GSL;
163],
NumPy
[164],
Cython [165], SciPy [166], MPI for Python [167],
Matplotlib [168], Jupyter [169], MultiNest [150],
PyMultiNest [151], kalepy [170], corner [171],
seaborn [172], NEoST [139].
Appendix A: Bosonic and Fermionic ADM
Posteriors
Fig. 6 and 7 show the posterior distributions
for the fermionic and bosonic ADM EoS parame-
ters, respectively. The corner plots of Fig. 6 and
7 (left panels) show that the posterior logarith-
mic ratio of gχ/mϕ to mχ of both ADM models
is only marginally more narrow than its priors.
Individually, the fermionic and bosonic ADM
EoS parameter posteriors are identical to their


24
log10(mχ/MeV) = 5.39+1.62
−1.64
−1
0
1
2
3
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV)
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV) = 0.29+1.66
−1.56
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
log10(mχ/MeV)
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
−1
0
1
2
3
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV)
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
Fχ [%] = 1.67+1.92
−1.25
Bosonic ADM Prior
Bosonic ADM Posterior
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
log10(
gχ
mφ/MeV/(mχ/MeV))
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fχ [%]
Bosonic Posterior
FIG. 7: Same as Fig. 6, but for bosonic ADM. The corner plot shows that the ratio of log(gχ/mχ)
and log10(mχ) can be slightly constrained, but individually all bosonic ADM parameters are
unconstrained relative to their respective priors. While in the right panel,
log10

gχ
(mϕ/MeV)/(mχ/MeV)

can be more tightly constrained for increasing Fχ, at both 1σ and 2σ
contour levels. We also find that the posterior ratio of gχ/mχ and mχ for bosonic ADM can be
more tightly constrained for all Fχ than that of fermionic ADM.
respective prior, indicating that the ADM EoS
parameters cannot be constrained individually
using the current NICER data.
As illustrated in Figs. 6 and 7, the Fχ-
log10

gχ
(mϕ/MeV)/(mχ/MeV)

space reveals that
higher values of Fχ lead to a narrower lower
bound for the (gχ/mϕ)/mχ posteriors (at both
68% and 95% confidence levels).
The upper
bounds, however, are unaffected by the data and
continue to match the priors for both ADM mod-
els. As Rutherford et al. [60] found, the lower
bound on the ratio of gχ/mϕ to mχ is more con-
strained for increasing Fχ because small ratios
produce compact ADM cores with high ADM cen-
tral densities, thus reducing the maximum neu-
tron star rapidly as Fχ increases. On the other
hand, for a given Fχ, a larger ratio of gχ/mϕ
to mχ (e.g., log10

gχ
(mϕ/MeV)/(mχ/MeV)

≈−4)
near the upper limits of the prior produces more
diffuse ADM cores with low ADM central densi-
ties compared to that of baryonic matter, which
affects the neutron star mass-radius less signifi-
cantly and therefore can fit NICER data more
easily.
The right panels of Figs. 6 and 7 also show
that the bosonic ADM posterior ratio of gχ/mχ to
mχ is more tightly constrained for all Fχ than the
posterior ratio for fermionic ADM. Bosonic ADM
is more sensitive to the ratio of self-repulsion
to ADM particle mass for increasing Fχ than
fermionic ADM. This is due to the fact that the
bosonic ADM pressure is entirely determined
by gχ/mϕ, where as the fermionic ADM pressure
has an additional term from the fermi degeneracy
pressure. Therefore, as Fχ increases for a given
ratio, the bosonic ADM core will become too
compact to satisfy the NICER data for a given
increase in Fχ than that of fermionic ADM. More
quantitatively, we find that the bosonic ADM


25
posterior is constrained to be
log10
 
gχ
(mϕ/MeV)(mχ/MeV)
!
≥−4.94+0.82
−1.42(−4.94+0.47
−0.71)
(A1)
at the 95% (68%) confidence level. However, the
fermionic ADM posterior is constrained to
log10
 
gχ
(mϕ/MeV)(mχ/MeV)
!
≥−5.26+1.10
−2.40(−5.26+0.69
−1.08)
(A2)
at the 95% (68%) confidence level. From the
observation that the posterior ratio of gχ/mχ to
mχ narrows for increasing Fχ for both bosonic
and fermionic ADM, we conclude that NICER
mass-radius measurements can constrain the ra-
tio of gχ/mχ to mχ with bosonic ADM exhibiting
tighter constraints.
[1] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami,
M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi,
M. Ballardini, A. J. Banday, R. B. Barreiro,
N. Bartolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed,
J. P. Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J.
Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, F. R. Bouchet,
F. Boulanger, M. Bucher, C. Burigana, R. C.
Butler, E. Calabrese, J. F. Cardoso, J. Car-
ron, A. Challinor, H. C. Chiang, J. Chluba,
L. P. L. Colombo, C. Combet, D. Contreras,
B. P. Crill, F. Cuttaia, P. de Bernardis, G. de
Zotti, J. Delabrouille, J. M. Delouis, E. Di
Valentino, J. M. Diego, O. Dor´e, M. Douspis,
A. Ducout, X. Dupac, S. Dusini, G. Efstathiou,
F. Elsner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen, Y. Fan-
taye, M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, R. Fernandez-
Cobos, F. Finelli, F. Forastieri, M. Frailis,
A. A. Fraisse, E. Franceschi, A. Frolov, S. Ga-
leotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga, R. T. G´enova-
Santos, M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, J. Gonz´alez-
Nuevo, K. M. G´orski, S. Gratton, A. Grup-
puso, J. E. Gudmundsson, J. Hamann, W. Han-
dley, F. K. Hansen, D. Herranz, S. R. Hilde-
brandt, E. Hivon, Z. Huang, A. H. Jaffe, W. C.
Jones, A. Karakci, E. Keih¨anen, R. Keskitalo,
K. Kiiveri, J. Kim, T. S. Kisner, L. Knox,
N. Krachmalnicoff, M. Kunz, H. Kurki-Suonio,
G. Lagache, J. M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby,
M. Lattanzi, C. R. Lawrence, M. Le Je-
une, P. Lemos, J. Lesgourgues, F. Levrier,
A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B. Lilje, M. Lilley,
V. Lindholm, M. L´opez-Caniego, P. M. Lu-
bin, Y. Z. Ma, J. F. Mac´ıas-P´erez, G. Mag-
gio, D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli,
A. Marcos-Caballero, M. Maris, P. G. Martin,
M. Martinelli, E. Mart´ınez-Gonz´alez, S. Matar-
rese, N. Mauri, J. D. McEwen, P. R. Mein-
hold, A. Melchiorri, A. Mennella, M. Migli-
accio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M. A. Miville-
Deschˆenes, D. Molinari, L. Montier, G. Mor-
gante, A. Moss, P. Natoli, H. U. Nørgaard-
Nielsen, L. Pagano, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge,
G. Patanchon, H. V. Peiris, F. Perrotta, V. Pet-
torino, F. Piacentini, L. Polastri, G. Polenta,
J. L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, M. Reinecke, M. Re-
mazeilles, A. Renzi, G. Rocha, C. Rosset,
G. Roudier, J. A. Rubi˜no-Mart´ın, B. Ruiz-
Granados, L. Salvati, M. Sandri, M. Save-
lainen, D. Scott, E. P. S. Shellard, C. Sirig-
nano, G. Sirri, L. D. Spencer, R. Sunyaev,
A. S. Suur-Uski, J. A. Tauber, D. Tavagnacco,
M. Tenti, L. Toffolatti, M. Tomasi, T. Trom-
betti, L. Valenziano, J. Valiviita, B. Van Tent,
L. Vibert, P. Vielva, F. Villa, N. Vittorio, B. D.
Wandelt, I. K. Wehus, M. White, S. D. M.
White, A. Zacchei, and A. Zonca. Planck 2018
results. VI. Cosmological parameters. Astron-
omy and Astrophysics, 641:A6, September 2020.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201833910.
[2] Vera C. Rubin and Jr. Ford, W. Kent. Rotation
of the Andromeda Nebula from a Spectroscopic
Survey of Emission Regions. Astrophys. J., 159:
379, February 1970. doi:10.1086/150317.
[3] V. C. Rubin, Jr. Ford, W. K., and N. Thonnard.
Extended rotation curves of high-luminosity
spiral galaxies. IV. Systematic dynamical prop-
erties, Sa -¿ Sc.
The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 225:L107–L111, November 1978. doi:
10.1086/182804.
[4] V. C. Rubin, Jr. Ford, W. K., and N. Thonnard.
Rotational properties of 21 SC galaxies with
a large range of luminosities and radii, from
NGC 4605 (R=4kpc) to UGC 2885 (R=122kpc).
Astrophys. J., 238:471–487, June 1980.
doi:


26
10.1086/158003.
[5] Douglas Clowe, Maruˇsa Bradaˇc, Anthony H.
Gonzalez, Maxim Markevitch, Scott W. Ran-
dall, Christine Jones, and Dennis Zaritsky. A
Direct Empirical Proof of the Existence of
Dark Matter. The Astrophysical Journal Let-
ters, 648(2):L109–L113, September 2006. doi:
10.1086/508162.
[6] Planck
Collaboration,
P.
A.
R.
Ade,
N.
Aghanim,
M.
Arnaud,
M.
Ashdown,
J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday,
R. B. Barreiro,
J. G. Bartlett,
N. Bar-
tolo, E. Battaner, R. Battye, K. Benabed,
A. Benoˆıt, A. Benoit-L´evy, J. P. Bernard,
M.
Bersanelli,
P.
Bielewicz,
J.
J.
Bock,
A. Bonaldi, L. Bonavera, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill,
F. R. Bouchet, F. Boulanger, M. Bucher,
C. Burigana, R. C. Butler, E. Calabrese,
J. F. Cardoso, A. Catalano, A. Challinor,
A. Chamballu, R. R. Chary, H. C. Chiang,
J. Chluba, P. R. Christensen, S. Church, D. L.
Clements, S. Colombi, L. P. L. Colombo,
C. Combet, A. Coulais, B. P. Crill, A. Curto,
F. Cuttaia, L. Danese, R. D. Davies, R. J.
Davis, P. de Bernardis, A. de Rosa, G. de
Zotti, J. Delabrouille, F. X. D´esert, E. Di
Valentino, C. Dickinson, J. M. Diego, K. Dolag,
H. Dole, S. Donzelli, O. Dor´e, M. Douspis,
A. Ducout, J. Dunkley, X. Dupac, G. Efs-
tathiou, F. Elsner, T. A. Enßlin, H. K. Eriksen,
M. Farhang, J. Fergusson, F. Finelli, O. Forni,
M. Frailis,
A. A. Fraisse,
E. Franceschi,
A. Frejsel, S. Galeotta, S. Galli, K. Ganga,
C. Gauthier, M. Gerbino, T. Ghosh, M. Giard,
Y. Giraud-H´eraud, E. Giusarma, E. Gjerløw,
J. Gonz´alez-Nuevo, K. M. G´orski, S. Gratton,
A. Gregorio, A. Gruppuso, J. E. Gudmunds-
son, J. Hamann, F. K. Hansen, D. Hanson,
D. L. Harrison, G. Helou, S. Henrot-Versill´e,
C.
Hern´andez-Monteagudo,
D.
Herranz,
S. R. Hildebrandt, E. Hivon, M. Hobson,
W. A. Holmes, A. Hornstrup, W. Hovest,
Z. Huang, K. M. Huffenberger, G. Hurier, A. H.
Jaffe, T. R. Jaffe, W. C. Jones, M. Juvela,
E. Keih¨anen, R. Keskitalo, T. S. Kisner,
R. Kneissl, J. Knoche, L. Knox, M. Kunz,
H. Kurki-Suonio, G. Lagache, A. L¨ahteenm¨aki,
J. M. Lamarre, A. Lasenby, M. Lattanzi, C. R.
Lawrence, J. P. Leahy, R. Leonardi, J. Lesgour-
gues, F. Levrier, A. Lewis, M. Liguori, P. B.
Lilje, M. Linden-Vørnle, M. L´opez-Caniego,
P. M. Lubin, J. F. Mac´ıas-P´erez, G. Maggio,
D. Maino, N. Mandolesi, A. Mangilli, A. Mar-
chini, M. Maris, P. G. Martin, M. Martinelli,
E. Mart´ınez-Gonz´alez, S. Masi, S. Matarrese,
P. McGehee, P. R. Meinhold, A. Melchiorri,
J.
B.
Melin,
L.
Mendes,
A.
Mennella,
M. Migliaccio, M. Millea, S. Mitra, M. A.
Miville-Deschˆenes, A. Moneti, L. Montier,
G. Morgante, D. Mortlock, A. Moss, D. Munshi,
J. A. Murphy, P. Naselsky, F. Nati, P. Natoli,
C. B. Netterfield, H. U. Nørgaard-Nielsen,
F. Noviello, D. Novikov, I. Novikov, C. A.
Oxborrow, F. Paci, L. Pagano, F. Pajot, R. Pal-
adini, D. Paoletti, B. Partridge, F. Pasian,
G. Patanchon, T. J. Pearson, O. Perdereau,
L. Perotto, F. Perrotta, V. Pettorino, F. Pia-
centini, M. Piat, E. Pierpaoli, D. Pietrobon,
S. Plaszczynski, E. Pointecouteau, G. Polenta,
L. Popa, G. W. Pratt, G. Pr´ezeau, S. Prunet,
J. L. Puget, J. P. Rachen, W. T. Reach, R. Re-
bolo, M. Reinecke, M. Remazeilles, C. Renault,
A. Renzi, I. Ristorcelli, G. Rocha, C. Rosset,
M. Rossetti, G. Roudier, B. Rouill´e d’Orfeuil,
M. Rowan-Robinson, J. A. Rubi˜no-Mart´ın,
B. Rusholme, N. Said, V. Salvatelli, L. Salvati,
M. Sandri, D. Santos, M. Savelainen, G. Savini,
D. Scott, M. D. Seiffert, P. Serra, E. P. S. Shel-
lard, L. D. Spencer, M. Spinelli, V. Stolyarov,
R. Stompor, R. Sudiwala, R. Sunyaev, D. Sut-
ton, A. S. Suur-Uski, J. F. Sygnet, J. A. Tauber,
L. Terenzi, L. Toffolatti, M. Tomasi, M. Tris-
tram, T. Trombetti, M. Tucci, J. Tuovinen,
M. T¨urler, G. Umana, L. Valenziano, J. Valivi-
ita, F. Van Tent, P. Vielva, F. Villa, L. A.
Wade, B. D. Wandelt, I. K. Wehus, M. White,
S. D. M. White, A. Wilkinson, D. Yvon,
A. Zacchei, and A. Zonca. Planck 2015 results.
XIII. Cosmological parameters.
Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 594:A13, September 2016.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201525830.
[7] Richard Massey, Thomas Kitching, and Jo-
han Richard. The dark matter of gravitational
lensing.
Reports on Progress in Physics, 73
(8):086901, August 2010.
doi:10.1088/0034-
4885/73/8/086901.
[8] Adam G. Riess, Alexei V. Filippenko, Pe-
ter Challis, Alejandro Clocchiatti, Alan Dier-
cks, Peter M. Garnavich, Ron L. Gilliland,
Craig J. Hogan, Saurabh Jha, Robert P. Kir-
shner, B. Leibundgut, M. M. Phillips, David
Reiss, Brian P. Schmidt, Robert A. Schom-
mer, R. Chris Smith, J. Spyromilio, Christopher
Stubbs, Nicholas B. Suntzeff, and John Tonry.
Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an
Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Con-
stant. The Astronomical Journal, 116(3):1009–
1038, September 1998. doi:10.1086/300499.
[9] Daniel J. Eisenstein et al.
Detection of the
Baryon Acoustic Peak in the Large-Scale Corre-


27
lation Function of SDSS Luminous Red Galax-
ies.
Astrophys. J., 633:560–574, 2005.
doi:
10.1086/466512.
[10] Carlos A. P. Bengaly.
Evidence for cosmic
acceleration with next-generation surveys: a
model-independent approach. Monthly Notices
of the RAS, 499(1):L6–L10, December 2020. doi:
10.1093/mnrasl/slaa040.
[11] Ivaylo Zlatev, Li-Min Wang, and Paul J.
Steinhardt.
Quintessence,
cosmic
coin-
cidence,
and
the
cosmological
constant.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 82:896–899, 1999.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.896.
[12] H. E. S. Velten, R. F. vom Marttens, and
W. Zimdahl. Aspects of the cosmological “coin-
cidence problem”. Eur. Phys. J. C, 74(11):3160,
2014. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-3160-4.
[13] T. Padmanabhan. Cosmological constant: The
Weight of the vacuum. Phys. Rept., 380:235–
320, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0370-1573(03)00120-0.
[14] Fred C. Adams. The degree of fine-tuning in
our universe — and others. Phys. Rept., 807:
1–111, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2019.02.001.
[15] Edmund J. Copeland, M. Sami, and Shinji
Tsujikawa.
Dynamics of dark energy.
Int.
J. Mod. Phys. D, 15:1753–1936, 2006.
doi:
10.1142/S021827180600942X.
[16] Alexander Yu. Kamenshchik, Ugo Moschella,
and Vincent Pasquier.
An Alternative to
quintessence. Phys. Lett. B, 511:265–268, 2001.
doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(01)00571-8.
[17] Lixin Xu, Jianbo Lu, and Yuting Wang. Re-
visiting generalized Chaplygin gas as a unified
dark matter and dark energy model. European
Physical Journal C, 72:1883, February 2012.
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1883-7.
[18] Jie Zheng, Shuo Cao, Yujie Lian, Tonghua Liu,
Yuting Liu, and Zong-Hong Zhu. Revisiting
Chaplygin gas cosmologies with the recent ob-
servations of high-redshift quasars. Eur. Phys.
J. C, 82(7):582, 2022. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-
022-10517-4.
[19] M. C. Bento,
O. Bertolami,
and A. A.
Sen. Generalized Chaplygin gas, accelerated
expansion and dark energy matter unifica-
tion.
Phys. Rev. D, 66:043507, 2002.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.66.043507.
[20] Ujjal Debnath, Asit Banerjee, and Subenoy
Chakraborty.
Role of modified Chaplygin
gas in accelerated universe.
Class. Quant.
Grav., 21:5609–5618, 2004. doi:10.1088/0264-
9381/21/23/019.
[21] Xin Zhang, Feng-Quan Wu, and Jingfei Zhang.
A New generalized Chaplygin gas as a scheme
for unification of dark energy and dark mat-
ter.
JCAP, 01:003, 2006.
doi:10.1088/1475-
7516/2006/01/003.
[22] Farook Rahaman, Saibal Ray, Abdul Kayum
Jafry, and Kausik Chakraborty. Singularity-
free solutions for anisotropic charged flu-
ids
with
Chaplygin
equation
of
state.
Phys.
Rev.
D,
82:104055,
2010.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.82.104055.
[23] Piyali Bhar, Megan Govender, and Ranjan
Sharma. Anisotropic stars obeying Chaplygin
equation of state. Pramana, 90(1):5, 2018. doi:
10.1007/s12043-017-1500-2.
[24] Piyali Bhar.
Dark energy stars in Tol-
man–Kuchowicz spacetime in the context of
Einstein gravity. Phys. Dark Univ., 34:100879,
2021. doi:10.1016/j.dark.2021.100879.
[25] Grigoris Panotopoulos,
´Angel Rinc´on, and
Il´ıdio Lopes.
Slowly rotating dark energy
stars. Phys. Dark Univ., 34:100885, 2021. doi:
10.1016/j.dark.2021.100885.
[26] Francisco Tello-Ortiz,
M. Malaver,
´Angel
Rinc´on, and Y. Gomez-Leyton.
Relativistic
anisotropic fluid spheres satisfying a non-linear
equation of state. Eur. Phys. J. C, 80(5):371,
2020. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-020-7956-0.
[27] Joaquin Estevez-Delgado,
Modesto Pineda
Duran,
Arthur Cleary-Balderas,
Noel En-
rique Rodr´ıguez Maya, and Jos´e Mart´ınez
Pe˜na.
Chaplygin strange stars in presence
of quintessence.
Modern Physics Letters
A, 36(29):2150213, September 2021.
doi:
10.1142/S0217732321502138.
[28] Juan M. Z. Pretel. Radial pulsations, moment
of inertia and tidal deformability of dark energy
stars. Eur. Phys. J. C, 83(1):26, 2023. doi:
10.1140/epjc/s10052-023-11198-3.
[29] L. F. Araujo, J. A. S. Lima, and G. Lu-
gones.
Impact of dark energy on the struc-
ture of neutron stars:
The vacuum case.
Phys. Rev. D, 110(4):043040,
2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.110.043040.
[30] Juan M. Z. Pretel, Mariana Dutra, and Ser-
gio B. Duarte.
Normal oscillation modes
and radial stability of neutron stars with
a dark-energy core from the Chaplygin gas.
Phys. Rev. D, 109(2):023524,
2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.109.023524.
[31] Juan M. Z. Pretel, Sergio B. Duarte, Jos´e D. V.
Arba˜nil, Mariana Dutra, and Odilon Louren¸co.
Dark energy effects on realistic neutron stars.
Phys. Rev. D, 110(12):124019, December 2024a.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.124019.
[32] Juan M. Z. Pretel, Mariana Dutra, and Ser-
gio B. Duarte. Neutron stars with a dark-energy
core from the Chaplygin gas. arXiv e-prints,


28
art. arXiv:2412.13568, December 2024b. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2412.13568.
[33] L. F. Araujo, G. Lugones, and J. A. S. Lima.
Dark interactions in neutron star interiors: The
interplay of baryons, dark matter, and dark
energy. Phys. Rev. D, 112(8):083012, 2025. doi:
10.1103/jdlr-p2z6.
[34] Paul Demorest, Tim Pennucci, Scott Ransom,
Mallory Roberts, and Jason Hessels. Shapiro
Delay Measurement of A Two Solar Mass Neu-
tron Star. Nature, 467:1081–1083, 2010. doi:
10.1038/nature09466.
[35] John Antoniadis, Paulo C. C. Freire, Nor-
bert Wex, Thomas M. Tauris, Ryan S. Lynch,
Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Michael Kramer, Cees
Bassa, Vik S. Dhillon, Thomas Driebe, Jason
W. T. Hessels, Victoria M. Kaspi, Vladislav I.
Kondratiev, Norbert Langer, Thomas R. Marsh,
Maura A. McLaughlin, Timothy T. Pennucci,
Scott M. Ransom, Ingrid H. Stairs, Joeri van
Leeuwen, Joris P. W. Verbiest, and David G.
Whelan. A Massive Pulsar in a Compact Rel-
ativistic Binary. Science, 340(6131):448, April
2013. doi:10.1126/science.1233232.
[36] Emmanuel Fonseca, Timothy T. Pennucci,
Justin A. Ellis, Ingrid H. Stairs, David J. Nice,
Scott M. Ransom, Paul B. Demorest, Zaven Ar-
zoumanian, Kathryn Crowter, Timothy Dolch,
Robert D. Ferdman, Marjorie E. Gonzalez,
Glenn Jones, Megan L. Jones, Michael T. Lam,
Lina Levin, Maura A. McLaughlin, Kevin Sto-
vall, Joseph K. Swiggum, and Weiwei Zhu. The
NANOGrav Nine-year Data Set: Mass and Ge-
ometric Measurements of Binary Millisecond
Pulsars. Astrophys. J., 832(2):167, December
2016. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/832/2/167.
[37] Zaven Arzoumanian, Adam Brazier, Sarah
Burke-Spolaor, Sydney Chamberlin, Shami
Chatterjee, Brian Christy, James M. Cordes,
Neil J. Cornish, Fronefield Crawford, H. Thank-
ful Cromartie, Kathryn Crowter, Megan E.
DeCesar, Paul B. Demorest, Timothy Dolch,
Justin A. Ellis, Robert D. Ferdman, Eliza-
beth C. Ferrara, Emmanuel Fonseca, Nathan
Garver-Daniels, Peter A. Gentile, Daniel Halm-
rast, E. A. Huerta, Fredrick A. Jenet, Cody Jes-
sup, Glenn Jones, Megan L. Jones, David L. Ka-
plan, Michael T. Lam, T. Joseph W. Lazio, Lina
Levin, Andrea Lommen, Duncan R. Lorimer,
Jing Luo, Ryan S. Lynch, Dustin Madison,
Allison M. Matthews, Maura A. McLaugh-
lin, Sean T. McWilliams, Chiara Mingarelli,
Cherry Ng, David J. Nice, Timothy T. Pennucci,
Scott M. Ransom, Paul S. Ray, Xavier Siemens,
Joseph Simon, Ren´ee Spiewak, Ingrid H. Stairs,
Daniel R. Stinebring, Kevin Stovall, Joseph K.
Swiggum, Stephen R. Taylor, Michele Vallisneri,
Rutger van Haasteren, Sarah J. Vigeland, Wei-
wei Zhu, and NANOGrav Collaboration. The
NANOGrav 11-year Data Set: High-precision
Timing of 45 Millisecond Pulsars. The Astro-
physical Journal Supplement Series, 235(2):37,
April 2018. doi:10.3847/1538-4365/aab5b0.
[38] H. T. Cromartie, E. Fonseca, S. M. Ransom,
P. B. Demorest, Z. Arzoumanian, H. Blumer,
P. R. Brook, M. E. DeCesar, T. Dolch, J. A.
Ellis, R. D. Ferdman, E. C. Ferrara, N. Garver-
Daniels, P. A. Gentile, M. L. Jones, M. T. Lam,
D. R. Lorimer, R. S. Lynch, M. A. McLaughlin,
C. Ng, D. J. Nice, T. T. Pennucci, R. Spiewak,
I. H. Stairs, K. Stovall, J. K. Swiggum, and
W. W. Zhu. Relativistic Shapiro delay mea-
surements of an extremely massive millisecond
pulsar. Nature Astronomy, 4:72–76, January
2020. doi:10.1038/s41550-019-0880-2.
[39] E. Fonseca, H. T. Cromartie, T. T. Pennucci,
P. S. Ray, A. Yu. Kirichenko, S. M. Ransom,
P. B. Demorest, I. H. Stairs, Z. Arzouma-
nian, L. Guillemot, A. Parthasarathy, M. Kerr,
I. Cognard, P. T. Baker, H. Blumer, P. R.
Brook, M. DeCesar, T. Dolch, F. A. Dong, E. C.
Ferrara, W. Fiore, N. Garver-Daniels, D. C.
Good, R. Jennings, M. L. Jones, V. M. Kaspi,
M. T. Lam, D. R. Lorimer, J. Luo, A. McEwen,
J. W. McKee, M. A. McLaughlin, N. McMann,
B. W. Meyers, A. Naidu, C. Ng, D. J. Nice,
N. Pol, H. A. Radovan, B. Shapiro-Albert, C. M.
Tan, S. P. Tendulkar, J. K. Swiggum, H. M.
Wahl, and W. W. Zhu. Refined Mass and Ge-
ometric Measurements of the High-mass PSR
J0740+6620. The Astrophysical Journal Let-
ters, 915(1):L12, July 2021. doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ac03b8.
[40] M. Shamohammadi, M. Bailes, P. C. C. Freire,
A. Parthasarathy, D. J. Reardon, R. M. Shan-
non, V. Venkatraman Krishnan, M. C. i.
Bernadich, A. D. Cameron, D. J. Champion,
A. Corongiu, C. Flynn, M. Geyer, M. Kramer,
M. T. Miles, A. Possenti, and R. Spiewak.
Searches for Shapiro delay in seven binary pul-
sars using the MeerKAT telescope. Monthly
Notices of the RAS, 520(2):1789–1806, April
2023. doi:10.1093/mnras/stac3719.
[41] Keith
C.
Gendreau,
Zaven
Arzoumanian,
Phillip W. Adkins, Cheryl L. Albert, John F.
Anders, Andrew T. Aylward, Charles L. Baker,
Erin R. Balsamo, William A. Bamford, Suyog S.
Benegalrao, Daniel L. Berry, Shiraz Bhalwani,
J. Kevin Black, Carl Blaurock, Ginger M.
Bronke, Gary L. Brown, Jason G. Budinoff,


29
Jeffrey D. Cantwell, Thoniel Cazeau, Philip T.
Chen, Thomas G. Clement, Andrew T. Colan-
gelo, Jerry S. Coleman, Jonathan D. Coop-
ersmith, William E. Dehaven, John P. Doty,
Mark D. Egan, Teruaki Enoto, Terry W. Fan,
Deneen M. Ferro, Richard Foster, Nicholas M.
Galassi, Luis D. Gallo, Chris M. Green, Dave
Grosh, Kong Q. Ha, Monther A. Hasouneh,
Kristofer B. Heefner, Phyllis Hestnes, Lisa J.
Hoge, Tawanda M. Jacobs, John L. Jørgensen,
Michael A. Kaiser, James W. Kellogg, Steven J.
Kenyon, Richard G. Koenecke, Robert P. Ko-
zon, Beverly LaMarr, Mike D. Lambertson,
Anne M. Larson, Steven Lentine, Jesse H. Lewis,
Michael G. Lilly, Kuochia Alice Liu, Andrew
Malonis, Sridhar S. Manthripragada, Craig B.
Markwardt, Bryan D. Matonak, Isaac E. Mcgin-
nis, Roger L. Miller, Alissa L. Mitchell, Jason W.
Mitchell, Jelila S. Mohammed, Charles A. Mon-
roe, Kristina M. Montt de Garcia, Peter D.
Mul´e, Louis T. Nagao, Son N. Ngo, Eric D.
Norris, Dwight A. Norwood, Joseph Novotka,
Takashi Okajima, Lawrence G. Olsen, Chi-
maobi O. Onyeachu, Henry Y. Orosco, Jacqua-
line R. Peterson, Kristina N. Pevear, Karen K.
Pham, Sue E. Pollard, John S. Pope, Daniel F.
Powers, Charles E. Powers, Samuel R. Price,
Gregory Y. Prigozhin, Julian B. Ramirez, Win-
ston J. Reid, Ronald A. Remillard, Eric M.
Rogstad, Glenn P. Rosecrans, John N. Rowe,
Jennifer A. Sager, Claude A. Sanders, Bruce
Savadkin, Maxine R. Saylor, Alexander F. Scha-
effer, Nancy S. Schweiss, Sean R. Semper, Pe-
ter J. Serlemitsos, Larry V. Shackelford, Yang
Soong, Jonathan Struebel, Michael L. Vezie,
Joel S. Villasenor, Luke B. Winternitz, George I.
Wofford, Michael R. Wright, Mike Y. Yang, and
Wayne H. Yu. The Neutron star Interior Com-
position Explorer (NICER): design and develop-
ment. In Jan-Willem A. den Herder, Tadayuki
Takahashi, and Marshall Bautz, editors, Space
Telescopes and Instrumentation 2016: Ultra-
violet to Gamma Ray, volume 9905 of Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, page 99051H, July
2016. doi:10.1117/12.2231304.
[42] Gianfranco Bertone and Malcolm Fairbairn.
Compact
Stars
as
Dark
Matter
Probes.
Phys.
Rev.
D,
77:043515,
2008.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.77.043515.
[43] Chris Kouvaris and Peter Tinyakov. Constrain-
ing Asymmetric Dark Matter through observa-
tions of compact stars. Phys. Rev. D, 83:083512,
2011. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.83.083512.
[44] Chris Kouvaris and Peter Tinyakov.
Ex-
cluding Light Asymmetric Bosonic Dark Mat-
ter. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107:091301, 2011. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.091301.
[45] Joseph Bramante, Keita Fukushima, and Ja-
son Kumar.
Constraints on bosonic dark
matter from observation of old neutron stars.
Phys. Rev. D, 87(5):055012,
2013.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.87.055012.
[46] John Ellis, Gert H¨utsi, Kristjan Kannike, Luca
Marzola, Martti Raidal, and Ville Vaskonen.
Dark matter effects on neutron star properties.
Phys. Rev. D, 97(12):123007, June 2018. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.97.123007.
[47] Ann E. Nelson, Sanjay Reddy, and Dake Zhou.
Dark halos around neutron stars and gravita-
tional waves. Journal of Cosmology and As-
troparticle Physics, 2019(7):012, July 2019. doi:
10.1088/1475-7516/2019/07/012.
[48] Arpan Das, Tuhin Malik, and Alekha C. Nayak.
Confronting nuclear equation of state in the
presence of dark matter using GW170817 obser-
vation in relativistic mean field theory approach.
Phys. Rev. D, 99(4):043016, February 2019. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.99.043016.
[49] H. C. Das, Ankit Kumar, Bharat Kumar, S. K.
Biswal, Takashi Nakatsukasa, Ang Li, and S. K.
Patra. Effects of dark matter on the nuclear
and neutron star matter. Monthly Notices of
the RAS, 495(4):4893–4903, July 2020.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/staa1435.
[50] O. Ivanytskyi, V. Sagun, and I. Lopes. Neutron
stars: New constraints on asymmetric dark mat-
ter. Phys. Rev. D, 102(6):063028, September
2020. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.102.063028.
[51] Debashree Sen and Atanu Guha. Implications
of feebly interacting dark sector on neutron
star properties and constraints from GW170817.
Monthly Notices of the RAS, 504(3):3354–3363,
July 2021. doi:10.1093/mnras/stab1056.
[52] Michael
Collier,
Djuna
Croon,
and
Re-
becca K. Leane.
Tidal Love numbers of
novel and admixed celestial objects.
Phys.
Rev. D, 106(12):123027, December 2022. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.106.123027.
[53] Zhiqiang Miao, Yaofeng Zhu, Ang Li, and Feng
Huang. Dark Matter Admixed Neutron Star
Properties in the Light of X-Ray Pulse Profile
Observations. Astrophys. J., 936(1):69, Septem-
ber 2022. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac8544.
[54] Davood Rafiei Karkevandi,
Soroush Shak-
eri, Violetta Sagun, and Oleksii Ivanytskyi.
Bosonic dark matter in neutron stars and
its effect on gravitational wave signal. Phys.
Rev. D, 105(2):023001, January 2022.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.105.023001.


30
[55] Pinku Routaray, Sailesh Ranjan Mohanty, H.C.
Das, Sayantan Ghosh, P.J. Kalita, Vishal Par-
mar, and Bharat Kumar. Investigating dark
matter-admixed neutron stars with nitr equa-
tion of state in light of psr j0952-0607. Jour-
nal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics,
2023(10):073, oct 2023.
doi:10.1088/1475-
7516/2023/10/073.
URL https://dx.doi.
org/10.1088/1475-7516/2023/10/073.
[56] Nathan
Rutherford,
Geert
Raaijmakers,
Chanda Prescod-Weinstein, and Anna Watts.
Constraining bosonic asymmetric dark matter
with neutron star mass-radius measurements.
Phys. Rev. D, 107(10):103051,
May 2023.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.107.103051.
[57] Violetta Sagun, Edoardo Giangrandi, Tim Di-
etrich, Oleksii Ivanytskyi, Rodrigo Negreiros,
and Constan¸ca Providˆencia. What Is the Na-
ture of the HESS J1731-347 Compact Object?
Astrophys. J., 958(1):49, November 2023. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/acfc9e.
[58] Joseph Bramante and Nirmal Raj. Dark matter
in compact stars. Phys. Rept., 1052:1–48, 2024.
doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2023.12.001.
[59] Edoardo Giangrandi, Afonso ´Avila, Violetta
Sagun, Oleksii Ivanytskyi, and Constan¸ca
Providˆencia. The Impact of Asymmetric Dark
Matter on the Thermal Evolution of Nucle-
onic and Hyperonic Compact Stars.
Par-
ticles,
7(1):179–200,
February 2024.
doi:
10.3390/particles7010010.
[60] Nathan Rutherford, Chanda Prescod-Weinstein,
and Anna Watts. Probing fermionic asymmetric
dark matter cores using global neutron star
properties. Phys. Rev. D, 111(12):123034, 2025.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.111.123034.
[61] Atanu Guha and Debashree Sen. Constrain-
ing the mass of fermionic dark matter from
its feeble interaction with hadronic matter
via dark mediators in neutron stars.
Phys.
Rev. D, 109(4):043038, February 2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.109.043038.
[62] Fazlollah Hajkarim, J¨urgen Schaffner-Bielich,
and Laura Tolos. Thermodynamic consistent
description of compact stars of two interacting
fluids: the case of neutron stars with Higgs
portal dark matter. JCAP, 08:070, 2025. doi:
10.1088/1475-7516/2025/08/070.
[63] Mauro
Mariani,
Conrado
Albertus,
M. del Rosario Alessandroni, Milva G. Orsaria,
M.
´Angeles P´erez-Garc´ıa,
and Ignacio F.
Ranea-Sandoval. Constraining self-interacting
fermionic dark matter in admixed neutron
stars using multimessenger astronomy. Monthly
Notices of the RAS, 527(3):6795–6806, January
2024. doi:10.1093/mnras/stad3658.
[64] Shafayat Shawqi and Sharon M. Morsink. In-
terpreting Mass and Radius Measurements of
Neutron Stars with Dark Matter Halos. Astro-
phys. J., 975(1):123, 2024. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ad77c1.
[65] Shafayat Shawqi, Andreas Konstantinou, and
Sharon M. Morsink. Rotating neutron stars
with dark matter halos. JCAP, 04:011, 2026.
doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2026/04/011.
[66] Prashant Thakur, Tuhin Malik, and Tarun Ku-
mar Jha. Towards Uncovering Dark Matter
Effects on Neutron Star Properties: A Machine
Learning Approach. Particles, 7(1):80–95, Jan-
uary 2024. doi:10.3390/particles7010005.
[67] Prashant Thakur, Tuhin Malik, Arpan Das,
T. K. Jha, and Constan¸ca Providˆencia. Ex-
ploring robust correlations between fermionic
dark matter model parameters and neutron
star properties: A two-fluid perspective. Phys.
Rev. D, 109(4):043030, February 2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.109.043030.
[68] Davood
Rafiei
Karkevandi,
Mahboubeh
Shahrbaf,
Soroush
Shakeri,
and
Stefan
Typel.
Exploring the Distribution and Im-
pact of Bosonic Dark Matter in Neutron
Stars.
Particles, 7(1):201–213, March 2024.
doi:10.3390/particles7010011.
[69] H. C. Das, Ankit Kumar, and S. K. Patra. Dark
matter admixed neutron star as a possible com-
pact component in the GW190814 merger event.
Phys. Rev. D, 104(6):063028, September 2021.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.104.063028.
[70] Mar
Bastero-Gil,
Teresa
Huertas-Roldan,
and
Daniel
Santos.
Neutron
decay
anomaly,
neutron
stars,
and
dark
mat-
ter.
Phys. Rev. D, 110(8):083003,
2024.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.083003.
[71] Edoardo Giangrandi, Violetta Sagun, Oleksii
Ivanytskyi, Constan¸ca Providˆencia, and Tim
Dietrich. The Effects of Self-interacting Bosonic
Dark Matter on Neutron Star Properties. As-
trophys. J., 953(1):115, 2023. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ace104.
[72] Andreas Konstantinou. The Effect of a Dark
Matter Core on the Structure of a Rotating
Neutron Star. Astrophys. J., 968(2):83, 2024.
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad4701.
[73] V. Sagun,
E. Giangrandi,
O. Ivanytskyi,
I. Lopes, and K. A. Bugaev. Constraints on
the fermionic dark matter from observations
of neutron stars. PoS, PANIC2021:313, 2022.
doi:10.22323/1.380.0313.
[74] Soroush Shakeri and Davood Rafiei Karkevandi.
Bosonic dark matter in light of the NICER


31
precise mass-radius measurements.
Phys.
Rev. D, 109(4):043029, February 2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.109.043029.
[75] Lee Lindblom. Determining the Nuclear Equa-
tion of State from Neutron-Star Masses and
Radii. Astrophys. J., 398:569, October 1992.
doi:10.1086/171882.
[76] Anna L. Watts. Constraining the neutron star
equation of state using pulse profile modeling.
In Xiamen-CUSTIPEN Workshop on the Equa-
tion of State of Dense Neutron-Rich Matter
in the Era of Gravitational Wave Astronomy,
volume 2127 of American Institute of Physics
Conference Series, page 020008, July 2019. doi:
10.1063/1.5117798.
[77] Slavko Bogdanov, Sebastien Guillot, Paul S.
Ray, Michael T. Wolff, Deepto Chakrabarty,
Wynn C. G. Ho, Matthew Kerr, Frederick K.
Lamb, Andrea Lommen, Renee M. Ludlam,
Reilly Milburn, Sergio Montano, M. Coleman
Miller, Michi Baub¨ock, Feryal ¨Ozel, Dimitrios
Psaltis, Ronald A. Remillard, Thomas E. Riley,
James F. Steiner, Tod E. Strohmayer, Anna L.
Watts, Kent S. Wood, Jesse Zeldes, Teruaki
Enoto, Takashi Okajima, James W. Kellogg,
Charles Baker, Craig B. Markwardt, Zaven Ar-
zoumanian, and Keith C. Gendreau. Constrain-
ing the Neutron Star Mass-Radius Relation and
Dense Matter Equation of State with NICER.
I. The Millisecond Pulsar X-Ray Data Set. The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 887(1):L25, De-
cember 2019. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab53eb.
[78] Slavko Bogdanov, Frederick K. Lamb, Simin
Mahmoodifar, M. Coleman Miller, Sharon M.
Morsink, Thomas E. Riley, Tod E. Strohmayer,
Albert K. Tung, Anna L. Watts, Alexander J.
Dittmann, Deepto Chakrabarty, Sebastien Guil-
lot, Zaven Arzoumanian, and Keith C. Gen-
dreau. Constraining the Neutron Star Mass-
Radius Relation and Dense Matter Equation of
State with NICER. II. Emission from Hot Spots
on a Rapidly Rotating Neutron Star. The Astro-
physical Journal Letters, 887(1):L26, December
2019. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab5968.
[79] Slavko Bogdanov, Alexander J. Dittmann,
Wynn C. G. Ho, Frederick K. Lamb, Simin
Mahmoodifar, M. Coleman Miller, Sharon M.
Morsink, Thomas E. Riley, Tod E. Strohmayer,
Anna L. Watts, Devarshi Choudhury, Sebastien
Guillot, Alice K. Harding, Paul S. Ray, Zo-
rawar Wadiasingh, Michael T. Wolff, Craig B.
Markwardt, Zaven Arzoumanian, and Keith C.
Gendreau. Constraining the Neutron Star Mass-
Radius Relation and Dense Matter Equation
of State with NICER. III. Model Description
and Verification of Parameter Estimation Codes.
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 914(1):L15,
June 2021. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/abfb79.
[80] Michael T. Wolff, Sebastien Guillot, Slavko Bog-
danov, Paul S. Ray, Matthew Kerr, Zaven Ar-
zoumanian, Keith C. Gendreau, M. Coleman
Miller, Alexander J. Dittmann, Wynn C. G.
Ho, Lucas Guillemot, Ismael Cognard, Gilles
Theureau, and Kent S. Wood. NICER Detec-
tion of Thermal X-Ray Pulsations from the
Massive Millisecond Pulsars PSR J0740+6620
and PSR J1614-2230. The Astrophysical Jour-
nal Letters, 918(2):L26, September 2021. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ac158e.
[81] Thomas E. Riley, Anna L. Watts, Paul S. Ray,
Slavko Bogdanov, Sebastien Guillot, Sharon M.
Morsink, Anna V. Bilous, Zaven Arzoumanian,
Devarshi Choudhury, Julia S. Deneva, Keith C.
Gendreau, Alice K. Harding, Wynn C. G. Ho,
James M. Lattimer, Michael Loewenstein, Re-
nee M. Ludlam, Craig B. Markwardt, Takashi
Okajima, Chanda Prescod-Weinstein, Ronald A.
Remillard, Michael T. Wolff, Emmanuel Fon-
seca, H. Thankful Cromartie, Matthew Kerr,
Timothy T. Pennucci, Aditya Parthasarathy,
Scott Ransom, Ingrid Stairs, Lucas Guille-
mot, and Ismael Cognard. A NICER View of
the Massive Pulsar PSR J0740+6620 Informed
by Radio Timing and XMM-Newton Spec-
troscopy. The Astrophysical Journal Letters,
918(2):L27, September 2021. doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ac0a81.
[82] M. C. Miller, F. K. Lamb, A. J. Dittmann,
S. Bogdanov, Z. Arzoumanian, K. C. Gen-
dreau, S. Guillot, W. C. G. Ho, J. M. Lattimer,
M. Loewenstein, S. M. Morsink, P. S. Ray,
M. T. Wolff, C. L. Baker, T. Cazeau, S. Man-
thripragada, C. B. Markwardt, T. Okajima,
S. Pollard, I. Cognard, H. T. Cromartie, E. Fon-
seca, L. Guillemot, M. Kerr, A. Parthasarathy,
T. T. Pennucci, S. Ransom, and I. Stairs. The
Radius of PSR J0740+6620 from NICER and
XMM-Newton Data. The Astrophysical Jour-
nal Letters, 918(2):L28, September 2021. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ac089b.
[83] Tuomo Salmi, Serena Vinciguerra, Devarshi
Choudhury, Thomas E. Riley, Anna L. Watts,
Ronald A. Remillard, Paul S. Ray, Slavko
Bogdanov, Sebastien Guillot, Zaven Arzouma-
nian, Cecilia Chirenti, Alexander J. Dittmann,
Keith C. Gendreau, Wynn C. G. Ho, M. Cole-
man Miller, Sharon M. Morsink, Zorawar Wa-
diasingh, and Michael T. Wolff.
The Ra-
dius of PSR J0740+6620 from NICER with
NICER Background Estimates. Astrophys. J.,


32
941(2):150, December 2022. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ac983d.
[84] Tuomo Salmi, Serena Vinciguerra, Devarshi
Choudhury, Anna L. Watts, Wynn C. G. Ho,
Sebastien Guillot, Yves Kini, Bas Dorsman,
Sharon M. Morsink, and Slavko Bogdanov. At-
mospheric Effects on Neutron Star Parame-
ter Constraints with NICER. Astrophys. J.,
956(2):138, October 2023. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/acf49d.
[85] Tuomo Salmi, Devarshi Choudhury, Yves Kini,
Thomas E. Riley, Serena Vinciguerra, Anna L.
Watts, Michael T. Wolff, Zaven Arzoumanian,
Slavko Bogdanov, Deepto Chakrabarty, Keith
Gendreau, Sebastien Guillot, Wynn C. G. Ho,
Daniela Huppenkothen, Renee M. Ludlam,
Sharon M. Morsink, and Paul S. Ray. The Ra-
dius of the High-mass Pulsar PSR J0740+6620
with 3.6 yr of NICER Data.
Astrophys. J.,
974(2):294, October 2024. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ad5f1f.
[86] Alexander J. Dittmann, M. Coleman Miller,
Frederick K. Lamb, Isiah M. Holt, Cecilia
Chirenti, Michael T. Wolff, Slavko Bogdanov,
Sebastien Guillot, Wynn C. G. Ho, Sharon M.
Morsink, Zaven Arzoumanian, and Keith C.
Gendreau.
A More Precise Measurement of
the Radius of PSR J0740+6620 Using Updated
NICER Data. Astrophys. J., 974(2):295, Octo-
ber 2024. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad5f1e.
[87] Mariska Hoogkamer, Yves Kini, Tuomo Salmi,
Anna L. Watts, and Johannes Buchner. Cross-
comparison of sampling algorithms for pulse
profile modeling of PSR J0740+6620. Phys.
Rev. D, 112(2):023008, 2025. doi:10.1103/cp8c-
2nbk.
[88] T. E. Riley, A. L. Watts, S. Bogdanov, P. S.
Ray, R. M. Ludlam, S. Guillot, Z. Arzoumanian,
C. L. Baker, A. V. Bilous, D. Chakrabarty, K. C.
Gendreau, A. K. Harding, W. C. G. Ho, J. M.
Lattimer, S. M. Morsink, and T. E. Strohmayer.
A NICER View of PSR J0030+0451: Millisec-
ond Pulsar Parameter Estimation. The Astro-
physical Journal Letters, 887(1):L21, December
2019. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab481c.
[89] M. C. Miller, F. K. Lamb, A. J. Dittmann,
S. Bogdanov, Z. Arzoumanian, K. C. Gen-
dreau, S. Guillot, A. K. Harding, W. C. G. Ho,
J. M. Lattimer, R. M. Ludlam, S. Mahmoodifar,
S. M. Morsink, P. S. Ray, T. E. Strohmayer,
K. S. Wood, T. Enoto, R. Foster, T. Okajima,
G. Prigozhin, and Y. Soong. PSR J0030+0451
Mass and Radius from NICER Data and Im-
plications for the Properties of Neutron Star
Matter.
The Astrophysical Journal Letters,
887(1):L24, December 2019. doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ab50c5.
[90] Serena Vinciguerra, Tuomo Salmi, Anna L.
Watts, Devarshi Choudhury, Yves Kini, and
Thomas E. Riley. X-PSI Parameter Recovery
for Temperature Map Configurations Inspired
by PSR J0030+0451. Astrophys. J., 959(1):55,
December 2023. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/acf9a0.
[91] Serena Vinciguerra, Tuomo Salmi, Anna L.
Watts, Devarshi Choudhury, Thomas E. Ri-
ley, Paul S. Ray, Slavko Bogdanov, Yves Kini,
Sebastien Guillot, Deepto Chakrabarty, Wynn
C. G. Ho, Daniela Huppenkothen, Sharon M.
Morsink, Zorawar Wadiasingh, and Michael T.
Wolff. An Updated Mass-Radius Analysis of the
2017-2018 NICER Data Set of PSR J0030+0451.
Astrophys. J., 961(1):62, January 2024. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/acfb83.
[92] Yves Kini, Lucien Mauviard, Tuomo Salmi,
Anna L. Watts, Sebastien Guillot, Bas Dors-
man, Devarshi Choudhury, Denis Gonz´alez-
Caniulef, Mariska Hoogkamer, Daniela Hup-
penkothen, Christine Kazantsev, Matthew Kerr,
Samaya Nissanke, Paul S. Ray, Pierre Stamm-
ler, and Serena Vinciguerra. A NICER View of
PSR J0030+0451: Updated Constraints from
Six Years of NICER Observations. arXiv e-
prints, art. arXiv:2602.23743, February 2026.
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.23743.
[93] Devarshi Choudhury et al. A NICER View of
the Nearest and Brightest Millisecond Pulsar:
PSR J0437–4715. Astrophys. J. Lett., 971(1):
L20, 2024. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ad5a6f.
[94] Daniel J. Reardon et al. The Neutron Star Mass,
Distance, and Inclination from Precision Tim-
ing of the Brilliant Millisecond Pulsar J0437-
4715.
Astrophys. J. Lett., 971(1):L18, 2024.
doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ad614a.
[95] M. C. Miller, A. J. Dittmann, I. M. Holt,
F. K. Lamb, C. Chirenti, Z. Arzoumanian,
J. Berteaud, S. Bogdanov, K. C. Gendreau,
W. C. G. Ho, S. M. Morsink, P. S. Ray, R. A.
Remillard, Z. Wadiasingh, and M. T. Wolff. The
Radius of PSR J0437-4715 from NICER Data.
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 1000(2):L48,
April 2026. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ae5057.
[96] Tuomo Salmi et al.
A NICER View of
PSR J1231−1411: A Complex Case. Astro-
phys. J., 976(1):58, 2024.
doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ad81d2.
[97] Liqiang Qi et al.
PSR J1231–1411 Revis-
ited: Pulse Profile Analysis of X-Ray Obser-
vation.
Astrophys. J., 981(2):99, 2025.
doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adb42f.
[98] Daniel J. Reardon et al. The Gravitational-wave


33
Background Null Hypothesis: Characterizing
Noise in Millisecond Pulsar Arrival Times with
the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array. Astrophys.
J. Lett., 951(1):L7, 2023.
doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/acdd03.
[99] Matthew T. Miles et al. The MeerKAT Pul-
sar Timing Array: the 4.5-yr data release and
the noise and stochastic signals of the mil-
lisecond pulsar population.
Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc., 536(2):1467–1488, 2024.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/stae2572.
[100] Lucien Mauviard et al. A NICER View of the
1.4 M⊙Edge-on Pulsar PSR J0614-3329. As-
trophys. J., 995(1):60, 2025. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ae145d.
[101] M. C. Miller et al. The Radius of the Neutron
Star PSR J0614-3329 from NICER Data. 9
2026.
[102] Gabriella Agazie et al.
The NANOGrav 15
yr Data Set: Observations and Timing of 68
Millisecond Pulsars. Astrophys. J. Lett., 951(1):
L9, 2023. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/acda9a.
[103] Lucien Mauviard et al. A NICER view of PSR
J1614−2230: a massive and compact millisec-
ond pulsar. 8 2026.
[104] Denis Gonz´alez-Caniulef et al. A NICER view
of the millisecond pulsar PSR J2124−3358: ev-
idence for a helium atmosphere. 7 2026.
[105] Melissa Mendes et al. Equation of state and
neutron star properties with new mass-radius
constraints from PSR˜J1614–2230, PSR˜J2124–
3358, and 47˜Tuc˜X7. 8 2026.
[106] G. Raaijmakers, T. E. Riley, A. L. Watts, S. K.
Greif, S. M. Morsink, K. Hebeler, A. Schwenk,
T. Hinderer, S. Nissanke, S. Guillot, Z. Arzou-
manian, S. Bogdanov, D. Chakrabarty, K. C.
Gendreau, W. C. G. Ho, J. M. Lattimer, R. M.
Ludlam, and M. T. Wolff. A Nicer View of
PSR J0030+0451: Implications for the Dense
Matter Equation of State. The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 887(1):L22, December 2019.
doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab451a.
[107] G. Raaijmakers, S. K. Greif, T. E. Riley, T. Hin-
derer, K. Hebeler, A. Schwenk, A. L. Watts,
S. Nissanke, S. Guillot, J. M. Lattimer, and
R. M. Ludlam. Constraining the Dense Mat-
ter Equation of State with Joint Analysis of
NICER and LIGO/Virgo Measurements. The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 893(1):L21, April
2020. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab822f.
[108] G. Raaijmakers, S. K. Greif, K. Hebeler,
T. Hinderer, S. Nissanke, A. Schwenk, T. E.
Riley, A. L. Watts, J. M. Lattimer, and
W. C. G. Ho. Constraints on the Dense Matter
Equation of State and Neutron Star Proper-
ties from NICER’s Mass-Radius Estimate of
PSR J0740+6620 and Multimessenger Observa-
tions. The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 918
(2):L29, September 2021.
doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ac089a.
[109] Isaac Legred, Katerina Chatziioannou, Reed
Essick, Sophia Han, and Philippe Landry. Im-
pact of the PSR J 0740 +6620 radius constraint
on the properties of high-density matter. Phys.
Rev. D, 104(6):063003, September 2021. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.104.063003.
[110] Bhaskar Biswas.
Bayesian Model Selection
of Neutron Star Equations of State Using
Multi-messenger Observations. Astrophys. J.,
926(1):75, February 2022.
doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/ac447b.
[111] Sabrina Huth, Peter T. H. Pang, Ingo Tews,
Tim
Dietrich,
Arnaud
Le
F`evre,
Achim
Schwenk, Wolfgang Trautmann, Kshitij Agar-
wal, Mattia Bulla, Michael W. Coughlin, and
Chris Van Den Broeck. Constraining neutron-
star matter with microscopic and macroscopic
collisions. Nature (London), 606(7913):276–280,
June 2022. doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04750-w.
[112] Eemeli Annala, Tyler Gorda, Joonas Hirvo-
nen, Oleg Komoltsev, Aleksi Kurkela, Joonas
N¨attil¨a, and Aleksi Vuorinen. Strongly inter-
acting matter exhibits deconfined behavior in
massive neutron stars. Nature Comm., 14:8451,
2023. doi:10.1038/s41467-023-44051-y.
[113] Chun Huang, Geert Raaijmakers, Anna L.
Watts, Laura Tolos, and Constan¸ca Providˆencia.
Constraining a relativistic mean field model
using neutron star mass–radius measurements
I: nucleonic models.
Mon. Not. Roy. As-
tron. Soc.,
529(4):4650–4665,
2024.
doi:
10.1093/mnras/stae844.
[114] Peter T. H. Pang, Lars Sivertsen, Rahul Soma-
sundaram, Tim Dietrich, Srimoyee Sen, Ingo
Tews, Michael W. Coughlin, and Chris Van
Den Broeck. Probing quarkyonic matter in neu-
tron stars with the Bayesian nuclear-physics
multimessenger astrophysics framework. Phys.
Rev. C, 109(2):025807, February 2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevC.109.025807.
[115] Nathan Rutherford et al.
Constraining the
Dense Matter Equation of State with New
NICER Mass–Radius Measurements and New
Chiral Effective Field Theory Inputs. Astrophys.
J. Lett., 971(1):L19, 2024. doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ad5f02.
[116] Jia Jie Li, Armen Sedrakian, and Mark Alford.
Confronting new NICER mass-radius measure-
ments with phase transition in dense matter
and twin compact stars. JCAP, 02:002, 2025.


34
doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2025/02/002.
[117] Chun
Huang,
Laura
Tolos,
Constan¸ca
Providˆencia, and Anna Watts. Constraining
a relativistic mean field model using neutron
star mass–radius measurements II: hyperonic
models. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 536(4):
3262–3275, 2025. doi:10.1093/mnras/stae2792.
[118] Aleksi Kurkela, Krishna Rajagopal, and Rachel
Steinhorst.
Astrophysical Equation-of-State
Constraints on the Color-Superconducting Gap.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 132(26):262701, June 2024.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.262701.
[119] Melissa Mendes,
Hannah G¨ottling,
Anna
Hensel, Isak Svensson, Kai Hebeler, Achim
Schwenk, Nathan Rutherford, and Anna Watts.
Astrophysics equation of state inference with
Bayesian chiral effective field theory uncertain-
ties. 5 2026.
[120] Arpan Das, Tuhin Malik, and Alekha C. Nayak.
Dark matter admixed neutron star properties
in light of gravitational wave observations: A
two fluid approach. Phys. Rev. D, 105:123034,
Jun 2022. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.105.123034.
[121] Jin-Biao Wei, G. Wu, H. Chen, G. F. Burgio,
and H.-J. Schulze. Dark matter effects on the
properties of hybrid neutron stars. Phys. Rev.
D, 113(8):083046, April 2026. doi:10.1103/kqj2-
hk7k.
[122] Jing Fu Hu, Hang Lu, and Bao Yuan Sun.
Limits on dark matter existence in neutron
stars from recent astrophysical observations
and mass correlation analysis. arXiv e-prints,
art. arXiv:2512.23577, December 2025.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2512.23577.
[123] Mahboubeh Shahrbaf, Prashant Thakur, and
Davood Rafiei Karkevandi. Probing strange
dark matter through f-mode oscillations of
neutron stars with hyperons and quark mat-
ter.
JCAP, 03:017, 2026.
doi:10.1088/1475-
7516/2026/03/017.
[124] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, et al.
Properties of the Binary Neutron Star Merger
GW170817. Phys. Rev. X, 9:011001, 2019. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevX.9.011001.
[125] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, et al.
GW190425: Observation of a Compact Binary
Coalescence with Total Mass ∼3.4 M⊙. The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 892:L3, 2020. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ab75f5.
[126] K. Hebeler, J. M. Lattimer, C. J. Pethick, and
A. Schwenk. Equation of state and neutron
star properties constrained by nuclear physics
and observation.
ApJ, 773:11, 2013.
doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/773/1/11.
[127] J. Keller, K. Hebeler, and A. Schwenk. Nu-
clear Equation of State for Arbitrary Proton
Fraction and Temperature Based on Chiral Ef-
fective Field Theory and a Gaussian Process
Emulator. Phys. Rev. Lett., 130:072701, 2023.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.130.072701.
[128] Ingo Tews, Joseph Carlson, Stefano Gandolfi,
and Sanjay Reddy. Constraining the speed of
sound inside neutron stars with chiral effective
field theory interactions and observations. As-
trophys. J., 860(2):149, 2018. doi:10.3847/1538-
4357/aac267.
[129] C. Drischler, J. W. Holt, and C. Wellenhofer.
Chiral Effective Field Theory and the High-
Density Nuclear Equation of State.
Ann.
Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci., 71:403, 2021.
doi:
10.1146/annurev-nucl-102419-041903.
[130] Jocelyn
S.
Read,
Benjamin
D.
Lackey,
Benjamin
J.
Owen,
and
John
L.
Fried-
man.
Constraints
on
a
phenomenologi-
cally
parametrized
neutron-star
equation
of state.
Phys. Rev. D, 79:124032,
Jun
2009.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.79.124032.
URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevD.79.124032.
[131] S. K. Greif, G. Raaijmakers, K. Hebeler,
A. Schwenk, and A. L. Watts.
Equation of
state sensitivities when inferring neutron star
and dense matter properties.
MNRAS, 485:
5363–5376, 2019. doi:10.1093/mnras/stz654.
[132] Gordon Baym, Christopher Pethick, and Peter
Sutherland. The Ground State of Matter at
High Densities: Equation of State and Stellar
Models. Astrophys. J., 170:299, December 1971.
doi:10.1086/151216.
[133] Kathryn M. Zurek.
Asymmetric Dark Mat-
ter:
Theories, signatures, and constraints.
Physics Reports, 537(3):91–121, April 2014. doi:
10.1016/j.physrep.2013.12.001.
[134] Kalliopi Petraki and Raymond R. Volkas. Re-
view of Asymmetric Dark Matter. International
Journal of Modern Physics A, 28(19):1330028,
July 2013. doi:10.1142/S0217751X13300287.
[135] Reed Essick, Isaac Legred, Katerina Chatziioan-
nou, Sophia Han, and Philippe Landry. Phase
transition phenomenology with nonparametric
representations of the neutron star equation
of state. Phys. Rev. D, 108(4):043013, 2023.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108.043013.
[136] Sophia Han, M. A. A. Mamun, S. Lalit,
C. Constantinou, and M. Prakash.
Treat-
ing quarks within neutron stars.
Phys.
Rev.
D,
100(10):103022,
2019.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.100.103022.
[137] Fredrik Sandin and Paolo Ciarcelluti. Effects
of mirror dark matter on neutron stars. As-


35
troparticle Physics, 32(5):278–284, December
2009. doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2009.09.005.
[138] Edoardo Giangrandi, Violetta Sagun, Oleksii
Ivanytskyi, Constan¸ca Providˆencia, and Tim
Dietrich. The Effects of Self-interacting Bosonic
Dark Matter on Neutron Star Properties. As-
trophys. J., 953(1):115, August 2023.
doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ace104.
[139] Geert Raaijmakers, Nathan Rutherford, Patrick
Timmerman, Tuomo Salmi, Anna L. Watts,
Chanda Prescod-Weinstein, Isak Svensson, and
Melissa Mendes. NEoST: A Python package for
nested sampling of the neutron star equation
of state. J. Open Source Softw., 10(105):6003,
2025. doi:10.21105/joss.06003.
[140] Tianqi Zhao and James M. Lattimer. Quarky-
onic
Matter
Equation
of
State
in
Beta-
Equilibrium. Phys. Rev. D, 102(2):023021, 2020.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.102.023021.
[141] Katerina
Chatziioannou
and
Sophia
Han.
Studying
strong
phase
transitions
in
neutron
stars
with
gravitational
waves.
Phys. Rev. D, 101(4):044019,
2020.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.101.044019.
[142] Eemeli Annala, Tyler Gorda, Aleksi Kurkela,
Joonas N¨attil¨a, and Aleksi Vuorinen.
Evi-
dence for quark-matter cores in massive neutron
stars. Nature Phys., 16(9):907–910, 2020. doi:
10.1038/s41567-020-0914-9.
[143] Richard C. Tolman. Static Solutions of Ein-
stein’s Field Equations for Spheres of Fluid.
Physical Review, 55(4):364–373, February 1939.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.364.
[144] J.
R.
Oppenheimer
and
G.
M.
Volkoff.
On Massive Neutron Cores.
Physical Re-
view, 55(4):374–381, February 1939.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.55.374.
[145] David Blaschke, Alexander Ayriyan, David Ed-
win Alvarez-Castillo, and Hovik Grigorian. Was
GW170817 a Canonical Neutron Star Merger?
Bayesian Analysis with a Third Family of Com-
pact Stars.
Universe, 6(6):81, 2020.
doi:
10.3390/universe6060081.
[146] Jan-Erik
Christian
and
J¨urgen
Schaffner-
Bielich. Confirming the Existence of Twin Stars
in a NICER Way. Astrophys. J., 935(2):122,
2022. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac75cf.
[147] Jos´e C. Jim´enez, Lucas Lazzari, and Vic-
tor P. Gon¸calves.
How the QCD trace
anomaly behaves at the core of twin stars?
Phys. Rev. D, 110(11):114014, 2024.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.110.114014.
[148] N. Rutherford, C. Prescod-Weinstein, and A. L.
Watts.
The full reproduction package for
NICER neutron stars with dark energy and dark
matter: effects on the inferred equation of state,
September 2026. URL https://www.doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.19261077.
[149] F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, and M. Bridges.
MULTINEST: an efficient and robust Bayesian
inference tool for cosmology and particle
physics. Monthly Notices of the RAS, 398(4):
1601–1614, October 2009. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2966.2009.14548.x.
[150] F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, E. Cameron, and A. N.
Pettitt. Importance Nested Sampling and the
MultiNest Algorithm. Open J. Astrophys., 2(1):
10, 2019. doi:10.21105/astro.1306.2144.
[151] J. Buchner, A. Georgakakis, K. Nandra, L. Hsu,
C. Rangel, M. Brightman, A. Merloni, M. Sal-
vato, J. Donley, and D. Kocevski. X-ray spectral
modelling of the AGN obscuring region in the
CDFS: Bayesian model selection and catalogue.
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 564:A125, April
2014. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322971.
[152] Thomas E. Riley, Devarshi Choudhury, Tuomo
Salmi, Serena Vinciguerra, Yves Kini, Bas Dors-
man, Anna L. Watts, Daniela Huppenkothen,
and Sebastien Guillot.
X-PSI: A Python
package for neutron star X-ray pulse simula-
tion and inference.
Journal of Open Source
Software, 8(82):4977, February 2023.
doi:
10.21105/joss.04977.
[153] K. Strobel, Ch. Schaab, and M. K. Weigel.
Properties of non-rotating and rapidly rotat-
ing protoneutron stars.
Astronomy and As-
trophysics, 350:497–512, October 1999.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9908132.
[154] David Radice, Adam Burrows, David Var-
tanyan, M. Aaron Skinner, and Joshua C.
Dolence.
Electron-capture and Low-mass
Iron-core-collapse Supernovae: New Neutrino-
radiation-hydrodynamics Simulations. Astro-
phys. J., 850(1):43, November 2017.
doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aa92c5.
[155] Yudai Suwa, Takashi Yoshida, Masaru Shi-
bata, Hideyuki Umeda, and Koh Takahashi.
On the minimum mass of neutron stars. MN-
RAS, 481(3):3305–3312, 09 2018. ISSN 0035-
8711. doi:10.1093/mnras/sty2460. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty2460.
[156] Moira I. Gresham and Kathryn M. Zurek.
Asymmetric dark stars and neutron star sta-
bility. Phys. Rev. D, 99(8):083008, April 2019.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.99.083008.
[157] Afonso ´Avila, Edoardo Giangrandi, Violetta
Sagun, Oleksii Ivanytskyi, and Constan¸ca
Providˆencia. Rapid neutron star cooling trig-
gered by dark matter.
Monthly Notices of
the RAS, 528(4):6319–6328, March 2024. doi:


36
10.1093/mnras/stae337.
[158] Lorenzo Cipriani, Edoardo Giangrandi, Violetta
Sagun, Daniela D. Doneva, and Stoytcho S.
Yazadjiev.
Rapidly spinning dark matter-
admixed neutron stars. Phys. Rev. D, 111(12):
123005, 2025. doi:10.1103/qcl7-m5kf.
[159] Christian Drischler, Sophia Han, James M.
Lattimer, Madappa Prakash, Sanjay Reddy,
and Tianqi Zhao.
Limiting masses and
radii of neutron stars and their implications.
Phys. Rev. C, 103(4):045808,
2021.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevC.103.045808.
[160] Roger W. Romani, D. Kandel, Alexei V. Filip-
penko, Thomas G. Brink, and WeiKang Zheng.
PSR J0952−0607:
The Fastest and Heavi-
est Known Galactic Neutron Star. Astrophys.
J. Lett., 934(2):L17, 2022. doi:10.3847/2041-
8213/ac8007.
[161] R. Abbott et al.
GW190814: Gravitational
Waves from the Coalescence of a 23 Solar Mass
Black Hole with a 2.6 Solar Mass Compact
Object. Astrophys. J. Lett., 896(2):L44, 2020.
doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab960f.
[162] T. E. Oliphant.
Python for scientific com-
puting. Computing in Science Engineering, 9
(3):10–20, May 2007.
ISSN 1521-9615.
doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2007.58.
[163] Brian Gough. GNU Scientific Library Refer-
ence Manual - Third Edition. Network The-
ory Ltd., 3rd edition, 2009. ISBN 0954612078,
9780954612078.
[164] S. van der Walt, S. C. Colbert, and G. Varo-
quaux. The numpy array: A structure for ef-
ficient numerical computation. Computing in
Science Engineering, 13(2):22–30, March 2011.
ISSN 1521-9615. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37.
[165] S. Behnel, R. Bradshaw, C. Citro, L. Dalcin,
D. S. Seljebotn, and K. Smith. Cython: The
best of both worlds.
Computing in Science
Engineering, 13(2):31–39, March 2011. ISSN
1521-9615. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2010.118.
[166] Pauli Virtanen,
Ralf Gommers,
Travis E.
Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David
Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson,
Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, St´efan J.
van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson,
K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew
R. J. Nelson, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric
Larson, C. J. Carey, ˙Ilhan Polat, Yu Feng,
Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas, Denis Lax-
alde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian
Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris,
Anne M. Archibald, Antˆonio H. Ribeiro, Fabian
Pedregosa, Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.
0 Contributors.
SciPy 1.0: fundamental al-
gorithms for scientific computing in Python.
Nature Methods, 17:261–272, February 2020.
doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[167] Lisandro Dalc´ın, Rodrigo Paz, Mario Storti,
and Jorge D’El´ıa.
Mpi for python: Perfor-
mance improvements and mpi-2 extensions.
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Comput-
ing, 68(5):655–662, 2008. ISSN 0743-7315. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2007.09.005.
[168] John D. Hunter.
Matplotlib: A 2D Graph-
ics Environment. Computing in Science and
Engineering,
9(3):90–95,
May 2007.
doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
[169] Thomas Kluyver, Benjamin Ragan-Kelley, Fer-
nando P´erez, Brian Granger, Matthias Busson-
nier, Jonathan Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica
Hamrick, Jason Grout, Sylvain Corlay, Paul
Ivanov, Dami´an Avila, Safia Abdalla, and Carol
Willing. Jupyter notebooks – a publishing for-
mat for reproducible computational workflows.
In F. Loizides and B. Schmidt, editors, Po-
sitioning and Power in Academic Publishing:
Players, Agents and Agendas, pages 87 – 90.
IOS Press, 2016.
[170] Luke Zoltan Kelley. kalepy: a python pack-
age for kernel density estimation, sampling and
plotting. Journal of Open Source Software, 6
(57):2784, 2021. doi:10.21105/joss.02784.
[171] Daniel Foreman-Mackey. corner.py: Scatter-
plot matrices in python.
The Journal of
Open Source Software, 1(2):24, jun 2016. doi:
10.21105/joss.00024.
[172] Michael L. Waskom. seaborn: statistical data
visualization. Journal of Open Source Software,
6(60):3021, 2021. doi:10.21105/joss.03021.
