Title: Constraints on Supermassive Black Hole Binaries from the Lack of Resolvable Sources in the NANOGrav 15-yr Dataset

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.32306v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 00:58:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Draft version September 29, 2026 Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1 

Constraints on Supermassive Black Hole Binaries from the Lack of Resolvable Sources in the NANOGrav 15-yr Dataset 

Emiko C. G ardiner ,1 Kayhan G¨ ultekin ,2 Philippe Turgeon ,3 Bence B´ ecsy ,3 Laura Blecha ,4 Nikita Agarwal ,5, 6 

Gabriella Agazie ,7 Akash Anumarlapudi ,8 Anne M. A rchibald ,9 Zaven Arzoumanian ,10 Anjana Ashok ,11 

Jeremy G. B aier ,11 Paul T. B aker ,12 Adam Brazier ,13, 14 Paul R. B rook ,3 Sarah Burke -S polaor ,5, 6, ∗ Rand Burnette ,11 

Robin Case ,11 J. A ndrew Casey -C lyde ,15 Maria Charisi ,16, 17 Shami Chatterjee ,13 Tyler Cohen ,18 James M. C ordes ,13 

Neil J. C ornish ,19 Fronefield Crawford ,20 H. T hankful Cromartie ,21 Kathryn Crowter ,22 Megan E. D eCesar ,23, †

Paul B. D emorest ,24 Heling Deng ,25 Lankeswar Dey ,17 Timothy Dolch ,26, 27, 28, 29 Graham M. D oskoch ,5, 6 

Elizabeth C. F errara ,30, 31, 32 William Fiore ,22 Emmanuel Fonseca ,5, 6 Gabriel E. F reedman ,32 Nate Garver -D aniels ,5, 6 

Peter A. G entile ,5, 6 Kyle A. G ersbach ,21 Joseph Glaser ,5, 6 Deborah C. G ood ,33 Aiden Gundersen ,19 C. J. H arris ,2

Jeffrey S. H azboun ,11 Ross J. J ennings ,5, 6, ‡ Aaron D. J ohnson ,7, 34 Megan L. J ones ,7 David L. K aplan ,7

Anala Kavumkandathil Sreekumar ,5, 6 Luke Zoltan Kelley ,35 Matthew Kerr ,36 Joey S. K ey ,37 Nima Laal ,21 

Michael T. L am ,29 William G. L amb ,21 Bjorn Larsen ,38 T. J oseph W. L azio ,39 Natalia Lewandowska ,40 Tingting Liu ,41 

Duncan R. L orimer ,5, 6 Jing Luo ,42, § Ryan S. L ynch ,43 Chung -P ei Ma ,1, 44 Dustin R. M adison ,45 Ashley Martsen ,5, 6 

Cayenne Matt ,2 Alexander McEwen ,7 James W. M cKee ,46 Maura A. M cLaughlin ,5, 6 Natasha McMann ,21 

Bradley W. M eyers ,47, 48 Patrick M. M eyers ,49 Matthew T. M iles ,21 Chiara M. F. M ingarelli ,38, 50 Andrea Mitridate ,51 

Cherry Ng ,52 David J. N ice ,53 Shania A. N ichols ,29, ‡ Stella Koch Ocker ,34, 54 Daniel J. O liver ,11, ‡ Ken D. O lum ,55 

Timothy T. P ennucci ,56 Benetge B. P. P erera ,57 Polina Petrov ,21 Nihan S. P ol ,58 Henri A. R adovan ,59 Scott M. R ansom ,60 

Paul S. R ay ,36 Joseph D. R omano ,58 Jessie C. R unnoe ,21 Alexander Saffer ,60, ‡ Shashwat C. S ardesai ,7

Ann Schmiedekamp ,61 Carl Schmiedekamp ,61 Kai Schmitz ,62 Levi Schult ,21 Brent J. S hapiro -A lbert ,5, 6, 63 

Xavier Siemens ,11, 7 Joseph Simon ,64, ¶ Sophia V. S osa Fiscella ,65 Ingrid H. S tairs ,22 Daniel R. S tinebring ,66 

Kevin Stovall ,24 Abhimanyu Susobhanan ,67 Joseph K. S wiggum ,53, ‡ Jacob Taylor ,11 Stephen R. T aylor ,21 

Mercedes S. T hompson ,22 Jacob E. T urner ,43 Michele Vallisneri ,49 Rutger van Haasteren ,67 Joris P. W. V erbiest ,68 

Sarah J. V igeland ,7 Haley M. W ahl ,5, 6 Kevin P. W ilson ,5, 6 Caitlin A. W itt ,69 David Wright ,11 and Olivia Young 70, 71 1Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, 501 Campbell Hall #3411, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

> 2

Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA 

> 3

Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy and School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 

> 4

Physics Department, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA 

> 5

Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, P.O. Box 6315, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA 

> 6

Center for Gravitational Waves and Cosmology, West Virginia University, Chestnut Ridge Research Building, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA 

> 7

Center for Gravitation, Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA 

> 8

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 

> 9

Newcastle University, NE1 7RU, UK 

> 10

X-Ray Astrophysics Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 662, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA 

> 11

Department of Physics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA 

> 12

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Widener University, One University Place, Chester, PA 19013, USA 

> 13

Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science and Department of Astronomy, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 

> 14

Cornell Center for Advanced Computing, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 

> 15

Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, 196 Auditorium Road, U-3046, Storrs, CT 06269-3046, USA 

> 16

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99163, USA 

> 17

Institute of Astrophysics, FORTH, GR-71110, Heraklion, Greece 

> 18

Department of Physics, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 801 Leroy Place, Socorro, NM 87801, USA 

> 19

Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA 

> 20

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Franklin & Marshall College, P.O. Box 3003, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA 

> 21

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 37235, USA 

> 22

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 6224 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada 

> 23

Department of Physics and Astronomy, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA 

> 24

National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 1003 Lopezville Rd., Socorro, NM 87801, USA 

> 25

Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory, Columbia University, 538 West 120th Street, New York, NY 10027, USA 

> 26

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA 

> 27

Department of Physics, Hillsdale College, 33 E. College Street, Hillsdale, MI 49242, USA 

> 28

Eureka Scientific, 2452 Delmer Street, Suite 100, Oakland, CA 94602-3017, USA arXiv:2609.32306v1 [astro-ph.HE] 26 Sep 2026 2

> 29

SETI Institute, 339 N Bernardo Ave Suite 200, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA 

> 30

Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 

> 31

Center for Research and Exploration in Space Science and Technology, NASA /GSFC, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA 

> 32

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA 

> 33

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Montana, 32 Campus Drive, Missoula, MT 59812, USA 

> 34

Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 

> 35

Astrophysics Working Group, NANOGrav Collaboration, Berkeley, CA, USA 

> 36

Space Science Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375-5352, USA 

> 37

University of Washington Bothell, 18115 Campus Way NE, Bothell, WA 98011, USA 

> 38

Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA 

> 39

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA 

> 40

Department of Physics and Astronomy, State University of New York at Oswego, Oswego, NY 13126, USA 

> 41

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University, 25 Park Place, Suite 605, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA 

> 42

Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 Saint George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada 

> 43

Green Bank Observatory, P.O. Box 2, Green Bank, WV 24944, USA 

> 44

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

> 45

Department of Physics, Occidental College, 1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041, USA 

> 46

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Union College, Schenectady, NY 12308, USA 

> 47

Australian SKA Regional Centre (AusSRC), Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia 

> 48

International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research (ICRAR), Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia 

> 49

ETH Zurich, Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 

> 50

Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA 

> 51

Abdus Salam Centre for Theoretical Physics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK 

> 52

Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George St., Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada 

> 53

Department of Physics, Lafayette College, Easton, PA 18042, USA 

> 54

The Observatories of the Carnegie Institution for Science, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA 

> 55

Institute of Cosmology, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA 

> 56

Institute of Physics and Astronomy, E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and University, P´ azm´ any P. s. 1 /A, 1117 Budapest, Hungary 

> 57

Arecibo Observatory, HC3 Box 53995, Arecibo, PR 00612, USA 

> 58

Department of Physics, Texas Tech University, Box 41051, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA 

> 59

Department of Physics, University of Puerto Rico, Mayag¨ uez, PR 00681, USA 

> 60

National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 520 Edgemont Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA 

> 61

Department of Physics, Penn State Abington, Abington, PA 19001, USA 

> 62

Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of M¨ unster, 48149 M¨ unster, Germany 

> 63

Giant Army, 915A 17th Ave, Seattle, WA 98122, USA 

> 64

Department of Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA 

> 65

ASTRON, Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD Dwingeloo, The Netherlands 

> 66

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074, USA 

> 67

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Gravitationsphysik (Albert-Einstein-Institut), Callinstraße 38, D-30167 Hannover, Germany Leibniz Universit¨ at Hannover, D-30167 Hannover, Germany 

> 68

Florida Space Institute, University of Central Florida, 12354 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826, USA 

> 69

Department of Physics, Wake Forest University, 1834 Wake Forest Road, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, USA 

> 70

School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA 

> 71

Laboratory for Multiwavelength Astrophysics, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA 

ABSTRACT Pulsar timing arrays (PTAs) have found evidence of a gravitational wave background (GWB) consistent with a population of supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHBs), but have not yet resolved a continuous wave (CW) from an individual binary. We present the first SMBHB population constraints incorporating PTA upper limits on CWs, based on the NANOGrav 15-year (NG15) data. Using semi-analytic models to generate simulated pop-ulations, we calculate each sample’s GWB likelihood by free spectral comparison and CW nondetection (nCW) likelihoods by (1) mapping each realization’s highest CW signal-to-noise ratio (S /N) to a detection probability and (2) counting the fraction of realizations without a binary close enough that NG15 would have detected it. CW nondetection favors populations in which many lower-mass sources, rather than a few ultramassive ones, dominate the GWB. This information is complementary to that provided by the GWB amplitude, breaking the 3degeneracy between the masses and number of binaries required to reproduce the observed spectrum. Relative to GWB-only constraints, the joint posteriors favor higher galaxy merger rates, lower MBH –Mbulge scatter, shorter binary lifetimes, and steeper small-separation hardening. The most detectable sources in the S /N-weighted joint posterior have chirp masses ∼ 10 9.6 M⊙, luminosity distances ∼ 1300 Mpc, and frequencies ∼ 6 nHz, while the nCW-only constraints favor lower frequencies, coinciding with the NG15 4 nHz candidate. These constraints will tighten if CW nondetection continues. 

Keywords: Gravitational waves — Pulsar timing arrays — Supermassive black holes  

> 1.

INTRODUCTION Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) reside in the centers of galaxies (D. Richstone et al. 1998), become binary systems when galaxies merge (C. Lacey & S. Cole 1993), co-evolve with their host galaxies (J. Kormendy & L. C. Ho 2013), and transfer energy to their environments, possibly reach-ing mpc separations and emitting gravitational waves (GWs) (M. C. Begelman et al. 1980; D. Merritt & M. Milosavljevi´ c2005). While this picture is well-motivated and formalized, open questions remain, including how many and how mas-sive the SMBH binaries (SMBHBs) are throughout cosmic time and how they harden through their final ∼parsec of sep-aration. Pulsar timing array (PTA) measurements and upper limits on gravitational wave signals o ff er a novel means of probing these questions (S. Burke-Spolaor et al. 2019; S. R. Taylor 2021). If SMBHBs are able to reach mpc separations, they would emit GWs that drive their final inspiral until merger, with their stochastic superposition creating a nanohertz gravita-tional wave background (GWB). PTAs have found evidence in the correlations of pulsar time delays for a GWB (G. Agazie et al. 2023b; J. Antoniadis et al. 2023b; D. J. Reardon et al. 2023; H. Xu et al. 2023; M. T. Miles et al. 2025) with a characteristic strain spectrum consistent with this SMBHB scenario (G. Agazie et al. 2023c; J. Antoniadis et al. 2023a). The number density of SMBHBs contributing to the GWB depends on the distribution of galaxies and their pair frac-tion (S. Chen et al. 2019). The galaxy stellar mass func-tion (GSMF) is well-constrained at low redshifts ( z ≲ 1) and intermediate stellar masses (10 9 ≲ M⋆/M⊙ ≲ 10 11 ), where galaxy surveys provide mass-complete samples (J. Leja et al. 2020; S. P. Driver et al. 2022). However, dis-crepancies remain in the low-number, high-mass tail, where previous Schechter mass functions may have under-counted ultramassive ( M⋆ ≳ 10 11 .5 M⊙) galaxies due to both cosmic      

> ∗Sloan Fellow
> †Resident at the Naval Research Laboratory
> ‡NANOGrav Physics Frontiers Center Postdoctoral Fellow
> §Deceased
> ¶NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellow

variance and underestimated bright-end mass-to-light ratios (E. R. Liepold & C.-P. Ma 2024). These discrepancies sig-nificantly impact the GWB, which is dominated by the most massive sources (G. Agazie et al. 2023c). The galaxies’ central SMBH masses are linked to their stellar masses and stellar velocity dispersions, indicating co-evolution between SMBHs and their host galaxies (J. Kor-mendy & L. C. Ho 2013; N. J. McConnell & C.-P. Ma 2013). These relations must be extrapolated from the local universe (within ∼ 100 Mpc), where it is possible to calculate the black holes’ masses from observations of their sphere of in-fluence. There are discrepancies between the masses pre-dicted via velocity dispersion and bulge mass, which grow at high redshifts (C. Matt et al. 2023) and for disk-dominated, low-mass galaxies (M. C. Huber et al. 2025). The relations may also break down during mergers themselves, with broad-line active galactic nuclei (AGN) close pairs hosting SMBHs more massive than standard MBH –Mbulge expectations (M. C. Huber et al. 2026). The redshift evolution introduces further uncertainty in both the MBH –Mbulge relation (C. Matt et al. 2026a) and bulge fraction, which also relies on measure-ments of local galaxies (P. Lang et al. 2014; A. F. L. Bluck et al. 2014). Additionally, intrinsic scatter in the MBH –Mbulge 

relation can inflate the GWB through Eddington-type bias (T. R. Lauer et al. 2007), preferentially shifting SMBHs up in mass because low-mass galaxies are far more numerous (C. Matt et al. 2026b). Not all the binaries created by galaxy mergers and co-evolved with their host galaxies will produce GWs. To do so, they must also decrease in separation, or harden, to about a mpc, at which point the binaries’ orbits induce strong enough perturbations in spacetime for GWs to extract signif-icant energy (P. C. Peters 1964; M. C. Begelman et al. 1980). The hardening mechanisms between galaxy-merger and GW emission have been studied theoretically, but their e ffi cien-cies remain uncertain and cannot be resolved by direct elec-tromagnetic observations. First, the SMBHs sink to the cen-ter of their post-merger galaxies by dynamical friction, which can be calculated analytically for simplified stellar systems (S. Chandrasekhar 1943) or by N-body simulations, which show discrepancies depending on the stellar and gaseous en-vironments (M. Boylan-Kolchin et al. 2008; E. C. Ostriker 41999). Dynamical friction becomes ine ffi cient at ∼pc separa-tions, at which point individual stellar scattering events can be more e ffi cient. However, these interactions are limited by the loss cone refill rate (J. Binney & S. Tremaine 1987). To bridge the gap from dynamical friction to GWs within a Hubble time, some additional energy extraction is required, with leading candidates including viscous drag from a cir-cumbinary disk (M. Siwek et al. 2023) or triple interactions (L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017; M. Bonetti et al. 2018). The GWB and single-source detection rate can help answer this “final parsec problem” (M. Milosavljevi´ c & D. Merritt 2003) by constraining the population of binaries that must have suc-cessfully crossed the final parsec (C. J. Harris et al. 2026). G. Agazie et al. (2023c, hereafter NG15astro) used the GWB spectrum, as measured by G. Agazie et al. (2023b), in agreement with other international PTAs (J. Antoniadis et al. 2023b; D. J. Reardon et al. 2023; H. Xu et al. 2023; M. T. Miles et al. 2025) to constrain the GSMF, the MBH –Mbulge re-lation, and a phenomenological model for binary hardening. They found that the GWB sits at the high end of astrophysi-cal expectations, favoring some combination of a high galaxy number density or merger rates, SMBH masses above typi-cal astrophysically motivated priors, and a rapid binary hard-ening, moving especially quickly through the viscous drag and stellar scattering regime. However, these parameters are strongly degenerate. The amplitude can be raised through the mass channel 

or the number channel . The mass channel includes any-thing leading to more massive black holes, including in-creasing the MBH –Mbulge relation so that the same galaxies host larger black holes or increasing the GSMF character-istic mass so that there are more galaxies with the highest-mass black holes. The number channel includes anything in-creasing the overall number of binaries contributing to the GWB, either through an increased number of galaxies in the GSMF normalization, a larger pair fraction or shorter merger timescale increasing the galaxy merger rate, faster pre-GW hardening, or longer residence times within the PTA band. The GWB spectrum alone cannot separate these channels (G. Sato-Polito et al. 2024). Even with realistic simulated data and astrophysically informed priors, GWB-only infer-ence on this model constrains the hardening parameters and GSMF characteristic mass while leaving the MBH –Mbulge pa-rameters prior dominated (N. Laal et al. 2026). E. C. Gar-diner et al. (2024), however, showed that information from individual sources can break these degeneracies, potentially tightening the constraints. An individual binary loud enough to be distinguished from the background would appear as a continuous gravitational wave (CW), a sinusoidal signal at roughly constant frequency over the observing baseline. Thus far, no CW has been de-tected by PTAs. G. Agazie et al. (2023d, hereafter NG15cw) conducted a Bayesian search for an individual source by fit-ting a common-uncorrelated-red-noise (CURN) + CW model to the timing data. They found excess likelihood for the CURN +CW model over a CURN-only model at two fre-quencies, with both candidates being discounted: the one at 4 nHz became disfavored after incorporating spatial cor-relations into the likelihood, and the other at 170 nHz was found to be highly dependent on the noise models employed (N. Agarwal et al. 2026a). N. Agarwal et al. (2026b) com-plemented this all-sky analysis with targeted searches toward 114 AGN flagged as SMBHB candidates by electromagnetic periodicity, fixing sky location, luminosity distance, and GW frequency to their EM values to tighten the strain upper limits by a median factor of ∼ 2 relative to the sky-averaged lim-its. Although two candidates retain marginal Bayes factors (∼ 2–3), none yielded a detection. This nondetection is consistent with the expectation that a CW would be observed ≳ 5 years after the first GWB de-tection (P. A. Rosado et al. 2015; L. Z. Kelley et al. 2018). However, E. C. Gardiner et al. (2025) showed that many SMBHB population scenarios consistent with the current GWB measurement should have also produced a CW de-tection. CW nondetection therefore rules out scenarios that the GWB amplitude alone cannot distinguish (E. C. Gardiner et al. 2024; B. Goncharov et al. 2026). We leverage this by using NG15cw Bayesian upper limits on individual sources to fold CW nondetection (nCW) into SMBHB population in-ference for the first time. Beyond population constraints, the properties of the most likely CW source—its mass, distance, and sky location—determine which galaxies are viable hosts and thus the prospects for multi-messenger follow-up once a CW is detected. Several works have predicted these proper-ties for the first detectable source (P. A. Rosado et al. 2015; E. C. Gardiner et al. 2024, 2025; B. Houlden et al. 2026); we update those predictions using the joint GWB and CW upper-limit constraints. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe our semi-analytic SMBHB popula-tions, the GWB and nCW likelihood methods, and our two sample libraries and their priors. In Section 3 we present the nCW-only posteriors (Section 3.1), the joint CW +GWB pos-teriors (Section 3.2), the mass and number e ff ects that drive these constraints (Section 3.3), and the updated predictions for the binary properties dominating the GWB and CW sig-nals (Section 3.4). We discuss the implications for the mass– number tension and prospects for future constraints in Sec-tion 4, and summarize our conclusions in Section 5.  

> 2.

METHODS We construct simulated populations of supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHBs) from semi-analytic models, compute their gravitational-wave background (GWB) and 5continuous-wave (CW) signals, and constrain the model pa-rameters using the NANOGrav 15-year (NG15) GWB free spectrum (G. Agazie et al. 2023b) and CW upper limits (NG15cw). 2.1. SMBHB Populations 

Our populations begin with a semi-analytic model that maps astrophysical parameters to a smooth number density of binaries across mass, mass ratio, redshift, and frequency. From each smooth distribution we draw discrete Poisson re-alizations, representing possible universes consistent with that parameter combination, and sum their strains to get the GWB spectrum. Finally, we assign the loudest binaries sky locations and orientations to compute the S /Ns of each real-ization’s CW candidates. 2.1.1. Semi-Analytic Model 

The semi-analytic model that we use to construct our SMBHB populations involves a (i) GSMF to set the initial distribution of host galaxies, (ii) galaxy pair fraction to de-termine which contain binaries, (iii) galaxy merger time to set the post-merger redshifts of the galaxies, (iv) bulge frac-tion that determines the bulge mass from the galaxy stel-lar mass, (v) relation between black hole mass and bulge mass ( MBH –Mbulge ) that determines the masses of the black hole binaries residing in each galaxy, and (vi) hardening model that determines the final redshifts at which each binary reaches the PTA frequencies. There are six free parameters subject to observational constraints: two in the GSMF, two in the MBH –Mbulge relation, and two in the hardening model. Uncertainties in the other model components are absorbed by these six free parameters. The following paragraphs de-tail the free parameters we aim to constrain, while a detailed description of the full model can be found in NG15astro.  

> GSMF —

The free parameters of the GSMF, which takes a Schechter form following S. Chen et al. (2019), are its present-day normalization, ψ0, which gives the overall nor-malization as a phenomenological function of redshift, log 10 

Ψ0/Mpc −3 = ψ0 + ψz · z, (1) and present-day characteristic mass, which similarly deter-mines the overall characteristic mass where the number den-sity drops o ff ,log 10 

Mψ/M⊙

 = mψ, 0 + mψ, z · z. (2) The normalization and characteristic mass, in combination with the low-mass-end slope, 

αψ = 1 + αψ, 0 + αψ, z · z (3) determine the initial distribution of galaxies as the total num-ber density per decade of stellar mass m⋆1, following the sin-gle Schechter function, 

Ψ(m⋆1, z) = ln(10) Ψ0 ·

" m⋆1

Mψ

#αψ

exp − m⋆1

Mψ

!

. (4) While ψ0 and mψ, 0 vary from −3.5 to −1.5 and 10.5 to 12.5, respectively, the remaining variables are fixed to the values listed in NG15astro Table B1.   

> MBH –M bulge Relation —

The free parameters describing the 

MBH –Mbulge relation are the dimensionless mass amplitude 

μ and the scatter ϵμ. The bulge mass is calculated from the galaxy stellar mass assuming a bulge fraction of 0.615, based on empirical observations from P. Lang et al. (2014) and A. F. L. Bluck et al. (2014). The black hole mass then fol-lows from the bulge mass via a power law with index αμ and random scatter drawn from a normal distribution of standard deviation ϵμ,log 10 (MBH /M⊙) = μ + αμ log 10 

Mbulge 

10 11 M⊙

!

+ N0, ϵ μ

. (5) 

αμ is fixed to 1.10, μ varies from 7.6 to 9.0, and ϵμ varies from 0.0 to 0.9 dex.  

> Hardening —

The free parameters in the phenom hardening model are total binary lifetime τ f and small-separation hard-ening index νinner . These describe a phenomenological hard-ening component that encapsulates all non-GW sources of hardening, such as dynamical friction, stellar scattering, vis-cous drag, and triple interactions. These environmental ef-fects are well described by a double power-law (L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017), 

da dt phenom 

= Ha · aac

!1−νinner 

· 1 + aac

!νinner −νouter 

(6) where νinner sets the hardening rate in the “inner” regime, and 

νouter sets the hardening rate in the “outer” regime, separated by a characteristic separation ac = 100 pc. The phenom com-ponent is normalized by the constant Ha < 0 such that the total binary lifetime τ f , from initial separation ainit = 10 4 pc to the innermost stable circular orbit aisco , is 

τ f =

Z aisco 

> ainit

da dt phenom 

+ da dt gw 

!−1

da , (7) where the overall hardening rate also includes a GW compo-nent determined by the binaries’ mass and separation, 

da dt gw 

= − 64 G3

5 c5

m1 m2 Ma3 . (8) We vary τ f from 0.1 to 11.0 Gyr and νinner from −1.5 to 0.0. While νouter = + 2.5 is fixed, the large-separation hardening 6                       

> Table 1. Uniform distributions of each free parameter. Parameter Symbol Prior Range GSMF Normalization ψ0U(−3.5,−1.5) GSMF Characteristic Mass mψ, 0U(10 .5,12 .5)
> MBH –Mbulge Amplitude μU(7 .6,9.0)
> MBH –Mbulge Scatter ϵμU(0 .0,0.9) dex Phenom Binary Lifetime τfU(0 .1,11 .0) Gyr Phenom Small-Separation Index νinner U(−1.5,0.0)

is sped up by slowing the inner regime, and vice versa, for fixed binary lifetime (see L. Blecha 2026, for further dis-cussion about the hardening parameterization and alternative functional forms). 2.1.2. Discrete Realizations 

We refer to a “sample” as a single selection of parameter values, which determines the comoving volumetric number density of SMBHBs ∂3η∂M∂q∂z and thus the di ff erential number of SMBHBs per total mass M, mass ratio q, redshift z (at the time of GW emission), and log rest-frame orbital frequency ln fp (A. Sesana et al. 2008): 

∂4 N

∂M ∂q ∂z ∂ ln fp

= ∂3η∂M ∂q ∂z

∂t

∂ ln fp

∂z

∂t

∂Vc

∂z . (9) Integrating the di ff erential number over each bin gives that bin’s expectation value, 

⟨N(M, q, z, f )⟩ =

Z

> bin

∂4 N

∂M′ ∂q′ ∂z′ ∂ ln f ′

> p

dM ′ dq ′ dz ′ d ln f ′

> p

,

(10) where the bins in rest-frame orbital frequency correspond to observed GW frequencies f = 2 fp/(1 + z) (assuming circular orbits, so the GW frequency is twice the orbital frequency). This integral is evaluated with the trapezoid rule in M, q, and 

z, and a left-edge Riemann sum in ln fp, so that the frequency bins match the PTA observing band rather than collapsing to bin centers. Then, to generate a population of binaries that could exist in a single universe, we draw the discrete number of binaries in each ( M, q, z, f ) bin from a Poisson distribution with mean equal to the expectation value, 

N(M,q,z, f ) = P  ⟨N(M,q,z, f )⟩. (11) Each Poisson draw (over all M, q, z, f bins) represents one “realization” of the sample. Each binary emits a sky- and polarization-averaged GW strain amplitude, assuming circular orbits (L. S. Finn & K. S. Thorne 2000) 

h2s,circ ( fp) = 32 5c8

(GMc)10 /3

d2

> c

2π fp

4/3

, (12) where Mc ≡ Mq 3/5/(1 + q)6/5 is the chirp mass and dc the comoving distance. Summing the strain from every binary in a realization gives the characteristic strain of the GWB, 

h2c ( f ) =

X

> M,q,z

N(M, q, z, f )h2s,circ ( fp) f

∆ f . (13) 2.1.3. Single Sources 

To analyze the single source detectability, we generate 

Nskies random “skies” for each realization. In a given “sky” we assign the loudest source at each frequency a colatitude 

θ, right ascension ϕ, inclination ι, polarization ψ, and ini-tial phase Φ0, all of which are drawn from isotropic dis-tributions, uniform in cos θ, ϕ, cos ι, ψ, and Φ0. These parameters, in combination with the chirp mass, strain am-plitude, and frequency, determine the signal, s, defined as in NG15cw. Then their signal-to-noise ratios (S /Ns) are (J. A. Ellis et al. 2012) S/N = p(s|s) (14) where the parenthetical notation refers to the noise-weighted inner product (a|b) = aT C−1b (15) for the noise covariance matrix C, as calculated in B. B´ ecsy et al. (2022a), where the GWB is treated as CURN such that 

C is block-diagonal across pulsars. All sources except the one in question are included as noise sources in C, in ad-dition to pulsar red noise and measurement noise matching the NG15 timing models (G. Agazie et al. 2023a). This S /Ncalculation corresponds to the “optimal S /N”, S /Ns, in E. C. Gardiner et al. (2025). Although the other detection statis-tics presented in that work better correlate with a Bayesian analysis of an individual simulated dataset by incorporating information about the noise in the data, we do not require the true detectability for an individual realization when making model constraints. Instead, we select the quickest calcula-tion that represents the typical detectability of a CW under a given model. 2.2. Constraints 

In order to calculate new constraints on the free parame-ters, we need some priors, likelihoods, and means of combin-ing them to get the posteriors. The GWB likelihood matches that of NG15astro, described in Section 2.2.1. We examine two methods of nCW likelihood calculation, our fiducial S /Napproach in Section 2.2.2 and an additional luminosity dis-tance approach in Section 2.2.3. These likelihoods are eval-uated directly at gridpoints sampled from two sets of priors: the uniform library and the chain library, described in Sec-tion 2.2.4. Each library has an appropriate means of weight-ing its distribution by the likelihoods to calculate posteriors, following the approach in NG15astro Appendix C, obviating the need for any Monte Carlo sampling. 72.2.1. GWB Likelihood 

The GWB likelihood is the probability of the observed times of arrival data, d, given a sample with holodeck pa-rameters, Θ. As in NG15astro, we use ceffyl (W. G. Lamb et al. 2023) posteriors on the free spectrum, log 10 ρi as an in-termediate data product, where ρ2 

> i

= Φ ( fi)/Tobs is the power in time residuals at frequency fi, instead of directly fitting a model to the TOAs. Marginalizing over ceffyl posteriors, and multiplying over the first N f = 5 frequency bin compo-nents, gives the total marginalized GWB likelihood 

LGWB (d|Θ) ∝ 

> Nf

Y

> i=1

Z

d(log 10 ρi)p(log 10 ρi|d)p(log 10 ρi|Θ).

(16) To calculate the model-predicted probability distribution, we assume the power is log-normally distributed, i.e., Gaussian in log 10 ρi with mean and standard deviation set by the me-dian and scatter of log 10 ρi over many realizations of a given sample. This form neglects the non-Gaussian tail of the un-derlying characteristic strain distribution (W. G. Lamb et al. 2026), but analytic treatments find the approximation su ffi -cient for population-level inference at current PTA sensitivity (G. Sato-Polito & M. Zaldarriaga 2025a; X. Xue et al. 2025; K. Iemoto et al. 2026). This likelihood is used implicitly in our chain library by drawing samples from the NG15astro Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) chain, as described in Section 2.2.4. We se-lect this approach for direct comparison to the GWB con-straints published in NG15astro. 2.2.2. nCW–S /N Likelihood 

The first nCW likelihood method uses the NG15cw global Bayes factor as our data. For a single realization i and sky placement j, we need the probability of not detecting a CW above this Bayes factor threshold, B. Following E. C. Gar-diner et al. (2025), we map the highest CW S /N in each realization and sky to a detection probability via the detec-tion fraction DF(S /N, B): the fraction of cases, among many simulated datasets containing a source of the given S /N, that yield a Bayes factor above B. The probability of nondetec-tion is then 

p(B| Θi, j) = 1 − DF(S /Ni, j, B). (17) With a nondetection probability for every Θi, j, we take the mean over realizations and skies to get the sample likelihood, 

LnCW, S /N(B| Θ) = 1

Nskies Nreals 

> Nreals

X

> i=1
> Nskies

X

> j=1

1 − DF(S /Ni, j, B) .

(18) This average is the fraction of possible universes consis-tent with model Θ in which no CW would have been de-tected above the NG15cw Bayes factor threshold, averaged 

Figure 1. Maximum CW S /N (top panel), corresponding 

LnCW, S /N distributions (middle panel), and LnCW ,dL distributions (bottom panel) for the uniform prior (solid black) and GWB poste-rior chain (dashed blue) libraries. The maximum S /Ns represent the most detectable source of each realization and sky assignment, and then the corresponding probabilities are averaged across realizations to get sample likelihoods. The uniform library contains more sam-ples with low S /Ns because these low S /Ns often correspond to low GWB amplitudes, disfavored by the GWB posteriors. This corre-sponds to a bimodal likelihood distribution in LnCW, S /N due to the sigmoid nature of the S /N–detection probability mapping. While the chain library has fewer low S /Ns ( ≲ 1), it also has fewer very high ( ≳ 12) S /N samples since these high S /Ns tend to result from the extremely low GWBs that provide little noise competition, or extremely large black hole numbers /masses that overestimate both the GWB and CW amplitudes. Thus the chain library likelihoods are concentrated at more intermediate values. The luminosity dis-tance likelihoods also have a bimodal uniform library distribution, and fewer low-likelihood scenarios in the chain library, but both are skewed towards higher likelihoods than LnCW, S /N.8over Poisson realizations and source orientations—that is, the probability of the observed nondetection given the model. We calibrate our detection fractions using the same CW detection pipeline as in NG15cw, QuickCW (B. B´ ecsy et al. 2022a), which performs a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) fit of a CW +CURN model to the timing data. 

QuickCW is faster than traditional pipelines like enterprise 

(J. A. Ellis et al. 2020) due to a custom likelihood method that pre-computes inner products for each set of “shape” pa-rameters (those involved in the noise covariance matrices) to rapidly explore the remaining “projection” parameters, like sky position, inclination, and initial phase. However, it is still too slow to run on the 50 million simulated realization-sky combinations necessary for model constraints, necessitating the S /N–DF mapping first described in E. C. Gardiner et al. (2025). The mapping between S /N and DF follows a Gaussian cu-mulative distribution function of the form DF(S /N, B) = 12

1 + erf 

 m · S/N − log 10 B

σ √2

 , (19) where the slope m and width σ are calibrated on ∼ 2000 sim-ulated datasets and their QuickCW Bayes factors. We use a Bayes factor threshold of B = 1.3282, which is the marginal likelihood ratio between the CW +CURN and CURN mod-els in NG15cw, marginalized over all frequencies up to 30 nHz. We exclude frequencies above 30 nHz because even when there is some statistical preference for the CW model, the astrophysical prior odds for such a high-frequency CW detection are negligible. The fit yields m = 0.03468 and 

σ = 0.1242, with a reduced χ2 = 0.912 and a 50% detection fraction at S /N50 = 3.554. This maps the S /N distributions in the top panel of Fig. 1 to the LnCW, S /N distributions in the middle panel, for the uniform (solid black) and chain (dashed blue) libraries, described in Section 2.2.4. 2.2.3. nCW–d L Likelihood 

The second nCW likelihood uses information from the ef-fective luminosity distance radius Reff which describes the frequency and chirp mass dependent single source exclu-sion volume at 95% credible level (detailed in NG15cw) as a lower bound on the distance of detectability of CW strains. We then infer parameter likelihoods proportional to the sum: 

LnCW ,dL (d|Θ) ∝ 1

Nreals 

> Nreals

X

> i=1

(1 − DP i) , (20) where the detection probability (DP) in a given realization is a binary value: DP i =



1 if there exists a binary with dL < Reff (Mc, f )0 otherwise .

(21)   

> Figure 2. Gravitational wave background, represented by the square root of the timing-residual power ρ, of the NG15 data (left--hand violins outlined in black), the uniform priors (right-hand vi-olins shaded gray), the GWB posteriors (left-hand violins shaded blue), and the nCW posteriors (right-hand violins outlined in pink). Solid horizontal lines mark the medians of each distribution. The NG15 data refers to the ce ff yl KDE representation of the DMGP free spectral fit (see G. Agazie et al. (2023b)). The GWB posteriors make up the chain library of samples. They are close to the data, but overshoot the lowest frequency bin amplitude. The uniform priors serve as the uniform library of samples, and weighting them by their S/N-method nCW likelihoods gives the nCW posteriors. The weak nCW constraints leave the nCW-only posteriors only slightly lower in amplitude than the uniform priors.

If a given realization contains an SMBHB located at a lu-minosity distance closer than the upper threshold set by NG15cw, it counts as a detection and contributes 0 to the sum. Otherwise, it contributes 1. This contribution is aver-aged over the number of realizations, providing a term pro-portional to the likelihood. We opted to use Reff , instead of the more commonly used upper limits on the strain amplitude, as those are dominated by the least sensitive part of the sky and not a realistic mea-surement of detectability. Using Reff circumvents this is-sue by e ff ectively volume-averaging the sensitivity across the sky, naturally giving more weight to more sensitive ar-eas (NG15cw). The resulting LnCW ,dL distributions for both sample libraries are shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 1. 2.2.4. Priors and Posteriors 

We generate two sets of samples, referred to as the uniform 

library and chain library. Each contains Nsamps = 10 , 000 samples of varying free parameters, Nreals = 100 realizations per sample, and Nskies = 50 per realization. Fig. 2 shows the free spectra of each library marginalized over all samples, with the chain library shaded in blue in the left-hand violins and the uniform library shaded in gray on the right-hand vio-lins. The free spectral fit to the NG15 data, using the DMGP model described in G. Agazie et al. (2023b), is outlined in 9black on the left-hand sides, and the CW-weighted uniform library is outlined in pink on the right-hand sides. The uniform library is necessary to isolate the GWB and nCW constraints before combining them into a joint poste-rior. The samples are drawn from the uniform distributions listed in Table 1 with Latin hypercube sampling, so that they optimally explore the six-dimensional parameter space for the given number of samples. Because the samples are uni-formly distributed in each parameter, the posteriors are just proportional to the likelihoods, 

π(Θ|d)GWB ∝ L GWB (22) 

π(Θ|d)CW ∝ L nCW (23) 

π(Θ|d)joint ∝ L GWB · L nCW . (24) Either LnCW, S /N or LnCW ,dL can be used for the nCW likeli-hood in Eq. (23). Although both nCW and GWB likelihoods depend on each realization’s background, realization-by-realization fluctua-tions are already captured by the population standard devi-ation in LGWB , so that the variation in LGWB between real-izations is smooth. Therefore, we can treat the GWB like-lihood as constant across realizations of a given sample and factor it out, treating the nCW and GWB likelihoods as ap-proximately independent. Having verified that the fully cou-pled per-realization calculation gives negligibly di ff erent re-sults from our factorized likelihood approach, we multiply the nCW and GWB likelihoods for each sample to obtain the joint posteriors in Eq. (24). While the uniform library is the only dataset that allows for nCW-only constraints, and shows a demonstrable shift from the priors in the free spectra in Fig. 2 and posteriors in Section 3.1, the chain library o ff ers better sampling for the GWB and joint posteriors. We draw 10,000 samples from the NG15astro MCMC posterior chain, which yields smoother GWB contours than a one-time likelihood calculation at the Latin hypercube gridpoints. The histogram of these samples, already concentrated in regions of highest GWB likelihoods, gives the GWB-only posteriors. These posteriors are gener-ally close to the NG15 data in Fig. 2, overshooting the first frequency bin because it is di ffi cult to recover both high am-plitudes and low-frequency flattening with the same astro-physical model. We can weight the GWB chain samples by their nCW like-lihoods to get the joint posteriors. This reweighting mini-mally decreases the e ff ective sample size because the nCW constraints are weaker than the GWB ones, demonstrated by the GWB posteriors on the free spectrum being much more concentrated than the nCW posteriors. This creates a slight shift from GWB to joint posteriors (see Section 3.2), which still benefits from the focus on high-likelihood regions. An nCW-only constraint is not possible with the GWB chain due to low e ff ective sample sizes in regions with high nCW like-lihood but low GWB likelihood. The two libraries also di ff er in their CW detectability. The uniform library distribution of S /N in Fig. 1 peaks low, at S/N ∼ 1.0. It maps to a bimodal distribution of likelihoods due to the sigmoid nature of Bayesian detection probabil-ity: most samples exist clearly in the detection or nondetec-tion regimes for our broad distribution of models. While the two nCW likelihood methods produce di ff erent distributions, they both show this bimodality. When concentrating the sam-ples towards areas of high GWB likelihood in the chain li-brary, the S /N distribution shifts higher, peaking around 2–3 instead of < 1, and the low-likelihood spike disappears be-cause samples that produce a loud GWB tend to also have better CW candidates.  

> 3.

RESULTS This work presents the first nCW-only and joint CW +GWB constraints on GSMF, MBH –Mbulge relation, and binary evolution models based on the NANOGrav 15-year GWB free spectrum and Bayesian upper limit on individual sources. The nCW-only posteriors are based on source S /Ns (Eq. (18)) or luminosity distances (Eq. (20)) for a uniformly distributed library of samples, presented and compared to the GWB posteriors in Section 3.1. Our joint posteriors are cal-culated using the GWB chain as the priors, reweighted by the two nCW likelihood methods, presented in Section 3.2. We investigate the physical explanations for these constraints in terms of the typical binary numbers and masses in Sec-tion 3.3. Finally, we show the distributions of binary prop-erties dominating the background and single sources in Sec-tion 3.4. 3.1. CW-Only Posteriors 

The Bayesian upper limits on individual CW sources in NG15cw o ff er new constraints on SMBHB populations, dis-tinct from GWB-based constraints. We find these constraints using two di ff erent likelihood methods: LnCW, S /N, which maps CW S /Ns to a probability of not having a Bayes factor exceeding that of NG15cw, and LnCW ,dL , which uses the frac-tion of realizations without binaries inside the exclusion vol-ume Reff around Earth. The posteriors on our six free param-eters (GSMF normalization ψ0, GSMF characteristic mass 

mψ, 0, MBH –Mbulge amplitude μ, MBH –Mbulge scatter ϵμ, binary lifetime τ f , and small-separation hardening index νinner ) by the S /N method in magenta and the dL method in yellow are presented in Fig. 3. The change from priors to nCW and GWB posteriors is quantified by the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence (S. Kull-back & R. A. Leibler 1951), 

DKL (P∥Q) =

X

> x

P(x) log 2

P(x)

Q(x) [bits] , (25) 10 

Figure 3. Corner plot comparing nCW-only posteriors to GWB-only posteriors on the model parameters summarized in Table 1, assuming uniform priors. The nCW-only posteriors by the S /N method are represented by solid magenta lines and the dL method by dashed yellow lines. The GWB-only posteriors are marked by blue dotted lines and the uniform priors are shaded gray. The 2D contours enclose the 68% and 95% credible regions of the Gaussian-smoothed weighted histograms (kernel width 7 .5% of each parameter range, which inflates the credible-region areas by ≤ 2.5%). The nondetection of CWs favors cases that limit opportunities for high-mass outliers: low GSMF normalization and characteristic mass, low MBH –Mbulge amplitude and scatter. The hardening parameter impacts are more subtle, and distinct between methods, because they impact CW detectability by shifting when and how many sources reach the PTA band. When the hardening time is shorter (τf ≲ 5 Gyr), CWs have a loud GWB to contend with, while at very long hardening times ( τf ≳ 9 Gyr), even though GWB noise is low, it is unlikely for any CW to rise above pulsar and measurement noise. Thus the LnCW, S /N marginal dips to a shallow minimum near ∼ 6–8 Gyr and rises toward both prior edges, more steeply at long lifetimes. The 1D marginal understates this structure because it averages over νinner .In combination, the two hardening parameters create a boomerang-shaped zone of avoidance visible in the magenta 2D contours, explored in Section 3.3 and Fig. 8. When the low GWB is not incorporated via an S /N, the long hardening times become even more favored by the dL

method. In the mass-sensitive pairs, e.g., μ versus mψ, 0, the nCW exclusion boundary runs parallel to the diagonal GWB degeneracy ridge, placing an upper limit on the shared mass combination. In the pairs combining a mass and number parameter, e.g., μ versus ψ0, the one-sided nCW bounds run perpendicular to the one-sided GWB bounds, providing complementary information with a localized region of overlap. 11           

> Figure 4. KL divergence DKL of each 1D marginal posterior from its reference distribution: GWB-only posteriors from uniform priors (blue circles), S /N nCW-only posteriors from uniform pri-ors (magenta squares), dLnCW-only posteriors from uniform priors (light yellow diamonds), reweighted S /N joint posteriors from GW-B-only posteriors (orange triangles), and reweighted dLjoint pos-teriors from GWB-only posteriors (dark yellow inverted triangles). The shaded band along each line extends to the 95th percentile of the corresponding null distribution. We generate the DKL (nCW ∥U) and DKL (joint ∥GWB) null distributions by shu ffl ing the sample like-lihood weights because their reference ( Q) and updated ( P) distri-butions use the same samples. We generate the DKL (GWB ∥U) null distributions by resampling within the uniform prior bounds, be-cause the GWB posteriors use a di ff erent sample library than the uniform priors.

which measures the information gained in moving from a reference distribution Q to an updated distribution P, here the 1D marginals over each free parameter x, as shown in Fig. 4. The color conventions match Fig. 3 and Fig. 5: 

DKL (S /N nCW ∥U) in magenta with square markers and 

DKL (dL nCW ∥U) in yellow with diamond markers, where U denotes the uniform priors. The GSMF and MBH –Mbulge 

parameters fall well above the 95th percentile region of their null distributions (shaded band), generated by randomly shu ffl ing the LnCW sample weights. The hardening parame-ters, whose nCW constraints largely average out in the 1D marginalization, sit closer to their null distributions. CW nondetection favors low characteristic mass, low 

MBH –Mbulge amplitude, and low MBH –Mbulge scatter. These corners of parameter space minimize the opportunity for massive outliers. Low GSMF normalization also improves nCW likelihoods, but to a lesser degree than the MBH –Mbulge 

and characteristic mass parameters. All four parameters can raise or lower the GWB amplitude, but they distribute the added strain di ff erently. Increasing mψ, 0, μ, or ϵμ prefer-entially strengthens the high-mass outliers, while increasing 

ψ0 scales up the number of all masses proportionally, so the numerous lower-mass sources reliably boost the background noise that a CW must overcome, while the Poisson odds of a loud outlier improve only through higher expectation values in the sparse high-mass tail. Long hardening times help avoid CW detection slightly by preferentially stalling the most massive sources, whose dwell times within the PTA band are fixed entirely by general rela-tivity. This 1D trend understates the structure in the harden-ing parameters, however, because it marginalizes over νinner .In 2D, CW nondetection disfavors an intermediate band at 

τ f ∼ 6–8 Gyr and moderate νinner , and allows both the short-lifetime, steep νinner region and a narrow corner at the longest lifetimes and flattest νinner , leaving a boomerang-shaped zone of avoidance between the allowable regions. This e ff ect is a result of our model parameterization, but likely matches the sign of physical mechanisms discussed in Section 4.1. Section 3.3 further explores how these parameters impact the CW candidates and GWB competition through their e ff ect on the populations’ mass and number distributions. The constraints agree between nCW likelihood methods for the majority of parameters, with a minor di ff erence in the strength of their binary lifetime trends. LnCW ,dL shows a stronger preference for longer hardening times because the only sources that reach the PTA band with large τ f tend to be low in mass (as explained in Section 3.3). These lower masses correspond to a smaller exclusion volume; that is, they can exist at shorter distances without surpassing CW upper limits. Meanwhile, the decreased number of massive sources reaching the PTA band also lowers the GWB noise, and the noise reduction partially o ff sets the weaker CW sig-nals so that LnCW, S /N changes little with τ f . The overall agreement between the two methods, which use di ff erent data products ( B and Reff ) and independent calculations, indicates that the constraints reflect the underlying CW nondetection, not the details of the likelihood construction. We compare the nCW KL divergences to DKL (GWB ∥U) in blue with circle markers. Its null distributions require resam-pling from the uniform prior ranges, rather than reshu ffl ing weights, because the GWB posteriors come from a separate library of samples. For most parameters, the GWB posteriors 12 diverge further from the uniform priors than the nCW poste-riors, but the nCW divergences are comparable for mψ, 0 and an order of magnitude larger for μ, as these two parameters are especially influential in determining CW detectability. The nCW-only and GWB-only (blue dotted lines) pos-teriors often di ff er because populations producing louder GWBs—through more massive and /or more numerous binaries—also tend to produce more detectable CWs, dis-favored by nCW likelihoods. The exception is populations whose GWB amplitude comes from a large number of lower-mass sources, which can match the observed GWB and the CW nondetection. The di ff erences in nCW and GWB con-straints shape the contour geometries. In pairs of mass-dominant parameters, e.g., μ versus mψ, 0, the diagonal GWB degeneracy ridge is parallel to the one-sided CW exclusion boundary, which limits the combinations of parameters to the lower-mass side of the GWB ridge. In pairs combining mass- and number-dominant parame-ters, e.g., μ versus ψ0, the one-sided nCW boundary runs per-pendicular to the one-sided GWB boundary, demonstrating that the nCW information is orthogonal to the GWB informa-tion. That is, in these combinations, the GWB more strongly constrains the number parameter while the CW nondetection more strongly constrains the mass parameter, confining the jointly allowed region to a corner. Similar orthogonality appears in τ f versus ψ0, where the two bounds run perpendicular across di ff erent diagonals: the GWB disallows the low ψ0, long τ f combination while the CW nondetection disallows the high ψ0, long τ f combina-tion, leaving low τ f as the overlapping allowed region. All three examples demonstrate that CW nondetection encodes new information, distinct from that of the GWB. 3.2. Joint Posteriors 

The nCW constraints di ff er from the GWB constraints but are generally weaker, so combining the two gives a joint pos-terior slightly shifted from the GWB posteriors. Because this shift is marginal, the chain library, made up of samples from the NG15astro GWB posteriors, is ideal for calculating joint posteriors with sampling focused on regions of highest probability. The chain samples make up the GWB poste-rior distributions marked by blue-dotted lines in Fig. 5. The joint posteriors, calculated by weighting the distributions by their nCW likelihoods, are shown in orange solid lines for the S/N method and dark yellow dashed lines for the dL method. Their KL divergences, relative to the GWB-only reference distributions, are shown in Fig. 4 with the same color conven-tions: DKL (S /N joint ∥GWB) in orange with triangle markers and DKL (dL joint ∥GWB) in dark yellow with inverted trian-gle markers. For many parameters, the joint constraints are tighter, pushing the 68% credible region of the 2D contours up against the prior boundaries. For example, all 2D contours containing ψ0 are pushed towards the ψ0 upper limit, binary lifetime compresses against its lower limit, and MBH –Mbulge 

scatter shifts closer to its lower limit. Curiously, the joint posterior favors higher ψ0 than the GWB-only posterior, despite the nCW-only posteriors trend-ing in the opposite direction. This occurs in the multidimen-sional parameter space because most low ψ0 samples un-dershoot the GWB, so the only samples with strong GWB agreement are in the high-mass tail, where CW nondetection probability is low. Thus, the high LGWB , low ψ0 samples are negated by low LnCW . On the other hand, about half of the high ψ0 samples overshoot the GWB, while those that agree with it tend to also have stronger LnCW , with fewer massive outliers, such that CW nondetection amplifies the likelihood of the samples in best agreement with the GWB at high ψ0. In short, when going from GWB posteriors to CW-weighted joint posteriors, the anti-correlation in GWB and nCW agreement decreases the likelihood at low ψ0, and the positive correlation in GWB and nCW agreement increases the likelihood at high ψ0. A similar scenario appears for τ f :nCW-only shows a slight preference for long lifetimes, while the joint posteriors prefer shorter lifetimes than GWB-only. Although the joint contours are tighter in most cases, a few open up small new allowable regions of parameter space. This includes lower mψ, 0 when plotted against ϵμ and steeper 

νinner versus any parameter. The shift in νinner corresponds to a more negative peak in the 1D νinner posterior distribu-tion, implying slower small-separation hardening and faster large-separation hardening. See Section 3.3 for an explana-tion of how steeper νinner causes a larger number of binaries and lower CW detectability. In Fig. 4, the narrowing and shifting from GWB-only to joint constraints are reflected by divergences DKL (joint ∥GWB) at least an order of magnitude larger than the corresponding null 95th percentile for every parameter except μ.3.3. Mass and Number E ff ects 

The impact of each astrophysical parameter on CW de-tectability can be understood in terms of the SMBHBs’ num-bers and masses, with the CW S /N maximized for high masses and low numbers. To describe these properties of the populations, we define two metrics: the strain-weighted av-erage chirp mass Mc,sw and the participation ratio Npar . The strain-weighted average chirp mass, Mc,sw , is calculated at each frequency by averaging over M, q, z bins, 

Mc,sw ( f ) =

PM,q,z N(M, q, z, f ) h2s,circ (M, q, z, f ) Mc(M, q)

PM,q,z N(M, q, z, f ) h2s,circ (M, q, z, f ) .

(26) 13 

Figure 5. Corner plot of the GWB and joint posteriors. The GWB posteriors (blue dotted) are a histogram of the chain library samples drawn from the NG15astro posteriors, based on uniform priors (shaded gray). We calculate the joint posteriors by reweighting the GWB chain samples by the S /N method nCW likelihoods (orange solid) and by the dL method nCW likelihoods (dark yellow dashed). The 2D contours have the same smoothing (kernel width 7.5% of each parameter range) as in Fig. 3. In many cases, the nCW reweighting pushes the posteriors towards their prior bounds, narrowing the constraints. The joint posteriors are shifted towards higher GSMF normalization, lower MBH –Mbulge scatter, shorter binary lifetime, and steeper (more negative) small-separation hardening index. 14 

Figure 6. CW nondetection likelihood dependence on strain-weighted average chirp mass and participation ratio. The ∼8 nHz Mc,sw median across all realizations of a given sample is plotted against the corresponding median ∼8 nHz Npar , colored by the sample’s likelihood LnCW, S /N and the S /N that maps to it. This frequency is high enough that the Mc,sw trends in Fig. 8 are easily decipherable, and low enough that the PTA data is not dominated by noise, detecting a CW is feasible, and Npar trends are also clear. S/N is maximized, and thus LnCW, S /N minimized, for high Mc,sw and low Npar because increasing Mc,sw boosts both the GWB and CW amplitudes, while increasing Npar distributes the same amplitude among a larger number of sources. 

The participation ratio, Npar , represents the inverse sum of source weights squared, 

Npar ( f ) ≡ 1

Pi w2

> i

(27) where the weight wi of each source i in a given frequency bin represents its normalized contribution to the background at that frequency, 

wi = h2s,circ,i 

P j h2s,circ,j 

. (28) This metric describes how democratic the GWB is. One can imagine the two extreme cases: if every binary contributes evenly to the background, then Npar would equal the total number of sources, and if the signal was dominated entirely by a single source, then Npar would approach 1. Thus, it is not just the number of binaries, but rather the number that contribute significantly to the background. We use the me-dian Npar and median Mc,sw for 100 Poisson realizations to represent each sample. The optimal scenario for continuous wave detection in-volves the GWB being dominated by a small number of ul-tramassive sources. This allows for more high-strain outliers, improving the odds of one being near enough to detect, while minimizing background noise. B. Houlden et al. (2026) in-dependently confirm the mass dependence, forecasting CW detection fractions for a 9.0-yr MeerKAT PTA to rise from 10% to 27% when they increase their characteristic black hole mass (similar to our mψ, 0) from 10 8.7 M⊙ to 10 9.3 M⊙.The mass–number interplay is apparent in Fig. 6, which contains a scatter plot of median Mc,sw versus Npar at 8 nHz, for each sample, colored by the sample’s LnCW, S /N. The col-orbar is also labeled with the S /Ns that correspond to those nondetection likelihoods via Eq. (19) and Eq. (18). The samples fill a triangular region of this parameter space, where the highest masses, log 10 Mc,sw /M⊙ ≳ 9.5, correspond to Npar ≲ 25 because masses this extreme will always domi-nate the background, if they exist, and will always be few in number relative to low-to-intermediate mass SMBHBs. In-termediate likelihoods and S /Ns trace a diagonal path from the bottom left, where the masses and number of sources dominating the GWB are both low, to the top right, where both metrics are high. Detectable CWs ( LnCW, S /N ≲ 0.25, S /N ≳ 6), plotted in yellow, can be found for Mc,sw as low as ∼ 10 8.5 M⊙ if the participation is extremely low ( Npar ≲ 3). If the strain-weighted chirp mass is very high ( Mc,sw ≳ 10 9.5M⊙), de-tectable CWs can correspond to participation ratios as high as Npar ∼ 20. At the highest participation ratios ( Npar ≳ 300), the CWs are generally not detectable ( LnCW, S /N ≳ 0.7, S /N ≲

2.0); this region lacks any samples with Mc,sw ≳ 10 9M⊙.The mass and number metrics serve as a bridge between the SMBHB model parameters and CW detectability. The strain-weighted mass slopes positively with all four GSMF and MBH –Mbulge parameters: (1) mψ, 0 directly increases the number of high-mass sources, (2) μ directly increases all bi-naries’ masses, (3) ϵμ preferentially scatters binaries to higher masses (T. R. Lauer et al. 2007), and (4) ψ0 improves the odds of Poisson sampling sources in any bin, including the high-mass tail, which only subtly raises Mc,sw because the number of lower-mass sources is also increased. These trends are demonstrated in the first two columns of Fig. 7 with the plasma color map. Each line represents the median Mc,sw across samples and realizations at the fre-quency marked by the colorbar. The trends for the GSMF and MBH –Mbulge parameters are generally consistent across all frequencies, with some being less apparent at high fre-quencies because so few sources dwell there. Increasing the binary lifetime tends to decrease Mc,sw through a mass fil-tration e ff ect described below, especially at high frequencies where massive sources are already rare due to their more en-ergetic GW emission driving them rapidly through high fre-quencies to coalescence. The impacts of each parameter on Npar are shown in the last two columns of Fig. 7 with the viridis color map. The slope of Npar is positive only for ψ0 because generating more bi-naries overall through a higher Schechter mass function nor-malization creates a more democratic signal, spread among more sources. The slopes are negative for mψ, 0, μ, and ϵμ,15 

Figure 7. Strain-weighted mass Mc,sw ( f ) and participation ratio Npar ( f ) as a function of each free parameter. The six panels on the left show median Mc,sw across samples and realizations plotted against the GSMF parameters ψ0 and mψ, 0 in the top row, MBH –Mbulge relation parameters 

μ and ϵμ in the middle row, and hardening parameters τf and νinner in the bottom row, colored by frequency for the first 15 frequency bins (2–30 nHz). The six panels on the right show median Npar across samples plotted against the same free parameters, for the same first 15 frequency bins. 

which all allow for more ultramassive sources that can dom-inate the GWB over the large number of weaker sources. 

Npar versus τ f also has a negative slope because fewer sources reach the PTA band when the binary lifetime is longer. Flatter νinner (for fixed total lifetime) also makes large-separation hardening less e ffi cient, so more sources stall in the kpc-to-pc regime, before speeding up in the pc-to-mpc regime. Thus the dwell times in the PTA band are shorter, thereby decreasing Npar through two means. The per-frequency lines show that Npar depends more strongly on the model at low frequencies because high-frequency sources are rare regardless of the SMBHB model, due to the rapid GW hardening rate near coalescence. The impacts of the binary hardening model on which sources reach and emit in the PTA band prove to be some-what more complex. To make sense of them, we show the 2D dependence of Mc,sw (left-hand panel) and Npar (right-hand panel) for the small-separation hardening index νinner versus the binary lifetime τ f in Fig. 8. In both panels, there are three boxed regions of parameter space that we use as examples to help explain the boomerang-shaped zone of avoidance in the nCW posteriors of Fig. 3. We consider these example cases as they increase in both 

νinner and τ f towards the top right of the contour plots. The first, in yellow, has central values of both parame-ters ( τ f ∈ [4 .4, 5.0] Gyr , ν inner ∈ [−0.86 , −0.78]), falling in the 68% nCW credible region; the second, in red, is in the zone of avoidance disallowed by CW upper limits (τ f ∈ [7 .8, 8.4] Gyr , ν inner ∈ [−0.46 , −0.38]); and the third, in purple, is back in the CW-allowed posteriors in the top right corner of νinner versus τ f (τ f ∈ [10 .2, 10 .8] Gyr , ν inner ∈

[−0.26 , −0.18]). The hardening timescale evolution and characteristic strain spectra of the samples in each of these case boxes are shown in Fig. 9, in the same colors. The top panel plots their hard-ening timescales, τ ≡ a/˙a as a function of separation for 10 8 M⊙ (dotted) and 10 10 M⊙ (solid) binaries, and the same linestyles outlining gray vertical bands show where these 16 

Figure 8. 2D contours of the strain-weighted chirp mass Mc,sw 

(left-hand panel) and the participation ratio Npar (right-hand panel) for the small-separation hardening index νinner versus the total binary lifetime τf , marginalized over GSMF and MBH –Mbulge parameters. Both are shown at ∼8 nHz as in Fig. 6. As τf increases, the domi-nant masses decrease because massive binaries’ more e ffi cient GW hardening requires stretching their phenomenological phase more to match the same fixed total lifetime, preferentially stalling them at large separations. As both parameters increase towards the top right, the number decreases through a combination of pre-PTA-band stalling and in-PTA-band e ffi ciency. These combined e ff ects create the boomerang-shaped zone of avoidance apparent in the νinner ver-sus τf panel of Fig. 3, where masses are high enough and numbers low enough that a CW likely would have already been detected. The black lines and shaded regions overlay the S /N method nCW-only posterior contours from Fig. 3, and the colored boxes mark three example cases whose evolution and spectra are shown in Fig. 9. 

10 8 M⊙ and 10 10 M⊙ binaries would be emitting within the NG15 PTA band. For the characteristic strain spectrum in the bottom panel, the 68% interval of CW candidates’ (the loudest source at each frequency in each realization) charac-teristic strain are hatched; the 68% interval of the remain-ing background sources is shaded in a darker version of each color and bounded by solid lines. In the first scenario, the background is loud with a hard-ening time short enough that many binaries can reach the PTA band, including high-mass binaries, with Npar ∼ 7.5and log 10 Mc,sw /M⊙ ∼ 9.2. The top panel shows that this intermediate νinner gives relatively long timescales at the be-ginning of the PTA band (shaded in gray for a 10 10 M⊙ case with solid lines and 10 8M⊙ case with dotted lines). This long dwell time keeps the number of sources contributing to the low-frequency GWB noise high, such that the GWB 68% interval on characteristic strain in the bottom panel is typ-ically louder than those of the CW candidates. Thus, CW detectability is low, and LnCW, S /N and LnCW ,dL are high. Moving to the red square at νinner ∼ − 0.4, τ f ∼ 8 Gyr de-creases both Mc,sw and Npar . This combination of changes primarily increases the kpc hardening timescales that take up most of the binaries’ lifetimes, while decreasing the ∼pc-scale timescales. Flattening νinner decreases the number of 

Figure 9. Hardening timescale evolution (top) and characteris-tic strain spectra (bottom) for the three example hardening cases marked by boxes in Fig. 8. The cases are (1) within the CW-al-lowed short-lifetime contours (yellow; τf ∼ 4.7 Gyr, νinner ∼ − 0.8), (2) inside the zone of avoidance (red; τf ∼ 8 Gyr, νinner ∼ − 0.4), and (3) in the CW-allowed long-lifetime corner (purple; τf ∼ 10 .5 Gyr, 

νinner ∼ − 0.2). Top: Hardening timescale τ ≡ a/˙a versus binary sep-aration for 10 10 M⊙ (solid) and 10 8 M⊙ (dotted) binaries; the gray bands mark the separations that produce NG15 PTA-band frequen-cies for each mass with the same linestyle conventions. Bottom: 

68% intervals on the GWB characteristic strain hc( f ) (darker shad-ing, solid outlines) and the loudest single sources (lighter hatch-ing). The 68% intervals span all realizations and samples inside each hardening case box; the GWB hc( f ) sums all sources except the single loudest per frequency per realization, and the hatched bands show those loudest sources. Dashed vertical lines bound the NG15 band. The red case o ff ers the best CW detection prospects because its CW candidates stand above a background weakened by mass filtration and reduced source counts, while the yellow case has comparably loud CWs washed out by a louder GWB, and the purple case has CWs exceeding the GWB but below the PTA noise floor. 

sources reaching the PTA band because the faster small-separation hardening requires slower large-separation hard-ening, so binaries of all masses are delayed, with fewer reach-ing PTA-band separations and frequencies. Longer τ f also means that fewer sources evolve quickly enough to reach the PTA frequency band, but unlike νinner , this also causes a shift in typical mass. Increasing binary lifetime preferen-tially filters out the most massive sources because the GW part of their lifetime is fixed to a shorter timescale than that of lower-mass binaries, due to more e ffi cient GW emission. Thus, the variable phenom part must increase more to reach 17 the same total lifetime, so the strain-weighted mass decreases to log 10 Mc,sw /M⊙ ∼ 8.8. Although this is specific to our phenom hardening model, it may represent a physical ef-fect: if hardening is generally less e ffi cient, e.g., by slower loss-cone refilling, weaker circumbinary disk interactions, or delayed dynamical friction, this could disproportionately af-fect the most massive sources because they have more or-bital energy requiring extraction through these environmental interactions. The characteristic strain spectrum shows that, while both GWB and CW candidate strains are lower, the CWs are often louder than the background at the crucial low-frequency end of this range, causing higher S /Ns. Our lack of CW detection implies low likelihood of this scenario. Increasing both parameters even further to the purple square in the top right of Fig. 8 decreases Npar to ∼1–2, meaning only a couple of sources dominate the signal due to large-separation stalling and short small-separation dwell times. Although the ultramassive black holes are in the GW regime for the whole PTA band, many binaries with masses below 10 10 M⊙ remain in the νinner regime for much of the PTA band, allowing the short dwell times to limit their num-ber. With such low numbers, the background o ff ers little noise competition, demonstrated by its very low amplitude in the bottom panel of Fig. 9. The longest τ f decreases log 10 Mc,sw /M⊙ to ∼ 8.2 through the preferential filtering of the most massive sources. Even without competition from the background, the CW amplitudes of such low-mass sources are too weak to compete with PTA noise, including pulsar red noise and measurement white noise. The third case is an extreme evolution scenario that is un-likely to reproduce the observed GWB because even if the other model components raise the masses and number of bi-naries, they cannot produce a large background if they do not harden to the GW regime. Still, this scenario is consistent with the lack of CW detection. Combining the GWB con-straints with this CW analysis disallows the low GWB am-plitude scenario. Thus, the region to the bottom left of the avoidance zone is the CW-favored region that shifts the joint constraints to lower τ f and steeper (more negative) νinner , rel-ative to the GWB-only posteriors. 3.4. Binary Properties 

The CW upper limits shift expectations for the binary properties dominating the GWB. In Fig. 10, we compare the uniform prior (gray shaded), GWB-only (blue), nCW-only (pink), and joint (orange) posteriors on the strain-weighted average total mass (top row), luminosity distance (middle row), and binary separation (bottom row) of the binaries in the first frequency bin ( ∼ 2 nHz, left-hand column) and fourth frequency bin ( ∼ 8 nHz, right-hand column). The GWB-only properties are those of the chain library, the nCW-only properties are from the uniform library weighted by           

> Figure 10. Total mass (top row), luminosity distance (middle row), and separation (bottom row) of the binaries dominating the GWB at ∼2 nHz (left-hand column) and ∼8 nHz (right-hand column). The uniform priors are shaded gray, the GWB posteriors (from the chain library) are blue, the nCW posteriors (from the uniform li-brary, weighted by LnCW, S /N) are pink, and the joint posteriors (from the chain library, weighted by LnCW, S /N) are orange. The median of each distribution is marked by a dotted vertical line. CW non-detection shifts the masses lower and separations slightly smaller, while the distances remain similar to the priors. The GWB poste-riors are narrower, favoring higher masses, larger separations, and further distances, while the joint posteriors remain near them, drawn slightly towards the nCW mass and separation. Massive sources, with large separations, dominate the lowest frequencies. As they evolve rapidly through higher frequencies, their numbers dwindle, and lower masses dominate the signal.

LnCW, S /N, and the joint properties are those of the chain li-brary weighted by LnCW, S /N.As in NG15astro, the GWB posteriors peak narrowly at high masses, with corresponding large separations. Going from 2 nHz to 8 nHz, the median strain-weighted total mass decreases from ∼ 10 9.8 M⊙ to ∼ 10 9.3 M⊙ because the most massive sources dominating the low-frequency end of the GWB evolve rapidly through high frequencies via strong GW emission. The nCW-only posteriors peak at lower to-tal masses than the priors, with medians near ∼ 10 9.2 M⊙

at 2 nHz and 10 8.7 M⊙ at 8 nHz, because lower masses im-prove consistency with the CW nondetection, especially at low frequencies where CWs are otherwise more likely to be 18 observed (P. A. Rosado et al. 2015; L. Z. Kelley et al. 2018; E. C. Gardiner et al. 2024). Thus weighting by LnCW, S /N

shifts the joint posteriors to visibly lower masses than the GWB posteriors at 2 nHz and to marginally lower masses at 8 nHz. The GWB posteriors exclude much of the short-luminosity-distance area spanned by the priors because they rule out the longest hardening times to which these short dis-tances tend to correspond. Meanwhile, the nCW constraints on the hardening model are much weaker, leaving the poste-riors on distance very similar to the priors. The CW properties that are most likely to be detected can be similarly informed by the data. In Fig. 11, the posteriors on rest-frame chirp mass (top), luminosity distance (middle), and GW frequency (bottom) of the max-S /N source in each sky of each realization are marked by solid lines, following the same color conventions of GWB in blue, nCW in pink, and joint in orange. This produces a data-driven estimate of the CW candidates that are most likely to exist. To also con-sider which of those we are most likely to detect, we weight them by their S /Ns, resulting in the dashed-line distributions. The nCW posteriors favor substantially lower masses than the GWB; their expected chirp mass peaks at 10 9.20 M⊙, with S/N-weighting shifting the peak to 10 9.47 M⊙. In compari-son, the GWB favors higher masses, peaking at 10 9.59 M⊙

based only on the data constraints and 10 9.70 M⊙ with S /N-weighting. Combining the data in the joint posteriors yields the most-favored chirp mass of ∼ 10 9.54 M⊙. Our joint-posterior chirp mass predictions are comparable to earlier ex-pectations, including pre-detection forecasts favoring Mc ∼

10 9–10 10 M⊙ (P. A. Rosado et al. 2015; C. M. F. Mingarelli et al. 2017). More recent works incorporate GWB informa-tion: B. B´ ecsy et al. (2022b) predict a median rest-frame chirp mass of 10 9.5 M⊙ and E. C. Gardiner et al. (2025) find a 68% credible interval of 10 9.2–10 9.8 M⊙, both in close agree-ment with our predictions despite di ff ering methods. As with the strain-weighted background properties, the CWs favor closer distances than the GWB-only posteriors, primarily as a result of their hardening model constraints. The CW upper limits favor candidates in the second fre-quency bin ( ∼ 4 nHz), regardless of S /N-weighting. While this is the same bin that the uniform priors favor, that pref-erence is strengthened by the nCW likelihoods. In contrast, the GWB-only posteriors peak at ∼ 6 nHz, with their me-dian at ∼ 8 nHz, suppressing the lowest two bins through two related e ff ects. First, detectable 2–4 nHz CWs arise pri-marily in samples with weak backgrounds, which are down-weighted by LGWB . Second, samples with a GWB matching NG15 have significant GWB noise contributing to the noise covariance matrix in our S /N calculation, Eq. (14), primar-ily impacting low frequencies where the GWB dominates the noise budget. As a result, the max S /N candidates are     

> Figure 11. Rest-frame chirp mass (top), luminosity distance (mid-dle), and observed gravitational wave frequency (bottom) of the most likely CW detections. The uniform priors (shaded gray) rep-resent the properties of the highest S /N CW from each sky in each realization of the uniform library; and the nCW-only (pink) rep-resent the same sources, weighted by LnCW, S /N.The GWB-only lines (blue) contain the most detectable CW in each sky realization of the GWB chain library; and the joint posteriors (orange) weight that distribution by LnCW, S /N. The dashed lines additionally weight each CW candidate by its S /N. The solid-line posteriors, with circles marking their peaks, convey the CW properties of the most likely scenarios, as informed by the GWB free spectra, CW nondetection, or both. Meanwhile, the S /N weighted (dashed lines with X’s at the peaks) describe only the most detectable sources that could exist under any of these constraints.

more likely to be at higher frequencies, up to 6–8 nHz, be-yond which pulsar and measurement noise overpower them. While those two e ff ects partially explain why the GWB-informed CW predictions of E. C. Gardiner et al. (2025) have higher frequencies than prior expectations, our GWB and joint posteriors still sit at the low end of their 4–12 nHz range. That work conditioned their populations on a power-law fit to the NG15 GWB, where high-amplitude, high-frequency 19 sources could improve the apparent agreement between the data and simulated power-law fits. We instead weight ran-domly drawn populations by their free-spectrum GWB and nCW likelihoods, eliminating the bias of a power-law as-sumption. Since the NG15 free spectrum is not well fit by a power law (G. Agazie et al. 2023c), these 6–8 nHz estimates are a more reliable prediction. The nCW peak in the second frequency bin also aligns with the 4 nHz candidate in NG15cw, which had a Bayes factor of 

∼ 4 in favor of the CW +CURN model over the CURN only model. This may lend some credence to the possibility of a real source there, but to let that candidate properly inform our constraints, the full NG15cw posteriors would need to be incorporated in the likelihood calculation (P. X. Turgeon et al. in preparation) as opposed to our methods using only a global Bayes factor or exclusion volume. The S /N-weighted joint posteriors (dashed orange lines) are the most informed estimates of CW properties. Based on those distributions, the most detectable CW sources in bi-nary populations consistent with the GWB and CW upper limits have a chirp mass of 10 9.58 M⊙, luminosity distance of 

∼ 1300 Mpc, and GW frequency in the third bin, ∼ 6 nHz. The shift in chirp mass relative to the GWB-only expecta-tions demonstrates that CW upper limits contain constraining power unexploited by previous GWB-only analyses.  

> 4.

DISCUSSION Our results demonstrate that CW upper limits add infor-mation complementary to the GWB, favoring populations in which the observed amplitude arises from many lower-mass binaries rather than a few ultramassive ones. We place these constraints in the context of the broader tension between the GWB amplitude and expectations from electromagnetic (EM) observations in Section 4.1. Then, we consider how future data will sharpen this picture in Section 4.2. 4.1. The Mass–Number Tension 

Best estimates for the GSMF, MBH –Mbulge relation, and binary hardening are informed by EM observations, the GWB, and now also CW upper limits. A tension exists be-tween these probes: the GWB amplitude predicted from the present-day abundance of SMBHs, derived from local scal-ing relations and galaxy catalogs, falls short of that observed by PTAs, even under optimistic assumptions of equal-mass mergers, short delay times, and negligible accretion after binary formation (G. Sato-Polito et al. 2024; D. Izquierdo-Villalba et al. 2022). The observed GWB must therefore be inflated relative to these EM-based expectations through higher masses or larger numbers of SMBHBs.  

> The Mass Channel —

EM arguments tend to favor the mass channel. E. R. Liepold & C.-P. Ma (2024) propose that the Schechter GSMFs miss ultramassive galaxies due to cosmic variance in the low number density, high-mass tail. They show that a GSMF recalibrated to the volume-limited MAS-SIVE survey predicts a higher GWB, consistent with the PTA measurement. Recent dynamical detections of additional 

≳ 10 10 M⊙ black holes in brightest cluster galaxies lend sup-port to this enhanced high-mass tail (S. de Nicola et al. 2025). From a di ff erent starting point, G. Sato-Polito et al. (2024) ar-gue that the only way to recover the observed GWB with a to-tal SMBH mass budget consistent with the integrated quasar luminosity function (A. Soltan 1982) is for the GWB to be dominated by ultramassive black holes. These arguments are limited by systematic uncertainty in the massive-end black hole mass function, which remains sensitive to the choice of scaling relation. The primary tracers, stellar velocity dis-persion and stellar mass, often disagree, with even the sign of the o ff set changing with redshift (C. Matt et al. 2023; G. Sato-Polito & M. Zaldarriaga 2025b).  

> The Number Channel —

GW arguments, including this work, point instead towards the number channel. We demonstrate that CW upper limits favor large numbers over high masses, because higher masses correlate with better CW detection prospects. This is independently corroborated by the smooth spectral shape of the GWB; G. Sato-Polito & M. Zaldarriaga (2025a) demonstrate that a background dominated by more massive sources and a lower source count would produce greater frequency-bin-to-bin excursions. The number chan-nel initially appears more EM-constrained, with the GSMF normalizations directly measured by mass-complete surveys (J. Leja et al. 2020; S. P. Driver et al. 2022), and the galaxy merger rates that set the binary abundance being limited by observed galaxy pairs (C. J. Conselice et al. 2022). Despite this, there is room for error in the galaxy merger rate. In our model, the pair fraction and galaxy merger times are fixed, so the GSMF normalization, ψ0, absorbs the un-certainty in all three factors; a higher ψ0 is therefore poten-tially better interpreted as a high SMBHB merger rate than as a literal excess of galaxies. This merger rate retains a factor-of-several freedom through uncertainties in the merger time. Our model infers this rate by dividing the observed pair fraction by an assumed merger time (S. Chen et al. 2019), and simulations show that merger times are shorter at higher redshift (G. F. Snyder et al. 2017), implying higher merger rates than one would naively expect from pair fraction ob-servations alone (C. J. Conselice et al. 2022). The merger rate also depends on binary mass ratio. In our model, the merger time scales inversely with mass ratio, suppressing unequal-mass pairs. Taking the alternate approach of extract-ing merger rates directly from simulations produces a larger number of unequal-mass binaries (V. Rodriguez-Gomez et al. 2015). While this di ff erence is unimportant for the GWB, which major mergers dominate, it strongly a ff ects the total binary abundance. Even with some freedom in the merger 20 rate, a semi-empirical model of SMBH demographics finds that merger rates high enough to fully source the GWB would overproduce the local black hole mass function (A. Lapi et al. 2026). Thus, whether this freedom su ffi ces to explain the high GWB amplitude remains contested.  

> Binary Hardening —

Binary hardening o ff ers a third knob, the least EM-constrained, for setting the SMBHB distribution. To isolate the nCW constraints, this work applies uniform or GWB-informed priors to all six parameters equally, but if the tighter EM priors on the GSMF and MBH –Mbulge rela-tion were imposed, the burden of amplifying the PTA-band number shifts onto the hardening model. In our model, this corresponds to joint constraints with a shorter binary lifetime and steeper νinner than in the GWB-only constraints. E ffi cient hardening from galactic to ∼pc scales delivers more binaries to the PTA band within a Hubble time, while slower harden-ing at small separations sustains long dwell times, and thus high source counts, within the band. Notably, the joint prefer-ence for steep νinner moves towards the value predicted by N-body simulations of stellar scattering, which find an approx-imately constant hardening rate ddt ( 1 

> a

) (G. D. Quinlan 1996; A. Sesana & F. M. Khan 2015; F. M. Khan et al. 2018), cor-responding to νinner = −1 in our parameterization (L. Blecha 2026). This appears in conflict with the NG15astro interpre-tation of the low-frequency GWB flattening as evidence of rapid small-separation hardening, but this turnover could still be explained by eccentricity moving power up to the higher harmonics (e.g., M. Enoki & M. Nagashima 2007; S. R. Tay-lor et al. 2016). Mapping the binary lifetime preference onto physical mechanisms requires more consideration. In our fixed-lifetime parameterization, increasing τ f preferentially stalls the most massive binaries because their GW-dominated phase is the shortest, so their phenom component stretches furthest to reach the same total lifetime. Nature provides a corresponding mechanism: Q. Yu (2002) finds the longest hardening bottlenecks in luminous core galaxies because (1) their low central densities slow stellar di ff usion into the loss cone, and (2) they host the most massive black holes, which experience a smaller relative energy extraction per stellar interaction. N-body stellar-scattering simulations reach the same conclusion, finding total binary mass among the strongest predictors of coalescence time, which increases by an order of magnitude between 10 7M⊙ and 10 10 M⊙ (K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. 2025). Dynamical friction generally runs in the other direction. Chandrasekhar drag strengthens with the mass of the inspi-raling body (S. Chandrasekhar 1943), so at large separa-tions the most massive systems should sink fastest. Gaseous drag can shorten this stage further, though predominantly in the lower-mass, gas-rich hosts. L. Mayer et al. (2007) find that the massive nuclear gas disk formed in a merger of two Milky-Way-mass spirals drives a pair of 2 .6 × 10 6 M⊙

black holes into a gravitationally bound pair in under a mil-lion years, through drag against the gas rather than the stars. F. M. Khan et al. (2016) recover a similarly rapid inspiral for higher-mass (10 8 M⊙) black holes merging at redshift z ∼ 3, but in their scenario the rapid dynamical friction hardening is driven by high stellar densities found in such high-redshift galaxies, as opposed to gas. Whether these speed-ups ex-tend to the higher-mass, lower-redshift ( z ≲ 1, see Fig. 10) binaries that dominate the GWB is unclear. Given that the most massive hosts are expected to be gas-poor early types, it is plausible that the most massive binaries stall, a scenario that would support the large number of lower-mass binaries favored by our CW upper limits. Our phenom model cannot resolve these questions on its own; by construction, its normalization ties PTA-band hard-ening to binary evolution at much larger separations, and the GWB spectrum changes little across wide ranges of νinner (L. Blecha 2026). Physically motivated parameterizations, such as the L. Blecha (2026) inside-out hardening model (BIO-hardening), used in conjunction with CW nondetections, of-fer a path toward constraining hardening e ffi ciency and how it depends on binary mass. 4.2. Future Prospects 

CW upper limits add a new piece of information to resolve the tension between the high GWB amplitude and expected SMBHB mass functions, but this puzzle is far from solved. While the field of CW astronomy is new and the constraints are still weak relative to the large accumulation of EM in-formation, we demonstrate that upper limits currently favor the number channel over the mass channel for amplifying the GWB, and this argument will be strengthened if nondetection continues. On the other hand, if the GWB is produced by SMB-HBs, then eventually CW detections are inevitable, and may even involve multiple sources, with new techniques for multi-CW modeling being developed for both PTAs and LISA (B. B´ ecsy & N. J. Cornish 2020; A. Gundersen & N. J. Cornish 2025; A. W. Criswell et al. 2026). In that scenario, instead of having upper limits rule out high-mass outliers, we will be able to infer the regions of parameter space that allow for our particular catalog of detections (S. M. Tomson et al. 2026). At that point, it will be necessary to replace our factor-ized likelihood approach with a full joint likelihood that can capture the interdependency of the GWB and multi-CW fits. This approach becomes feasible with flow-based emulators (N. Laal et al. 2025), which run faster and better represent the full shape of the GWB probability distribution. N. Laal et al. (2026) use this machinery for GWB-only population inference with simulated data, where they find degeneracies 21 in their parameter recoveries that CW information could help break.  

> 5.

CONCLUSIONS In this work, we present the first constraints on SMBHB populations that incorporate current PTA upper limits on CWs. Our conclusions are summarized as follows: 1. The nondetection of CWs favors SMBHB populations with many lower-mass sources over few ultramassive ones. This can come about through some combination of low GSMF characteristic mass, low MBH –Mbulge 

relation amplitude, and /or low MBH –Mbulge relation scatter to keep typical masses low, and high galaxy merger rate (absorbed by our GSMF normalization) to raise the number of contributing sources. Effi -cient hardening through the kpc-to-pc regime com-bined with longer dwell times in the late stellar scat-tering /circumbinary disk regime o ff er another means of increasing the number of binaries, without as strong EM limitations as the GSMF. 2. CW upper limits disfavor an intermediate zone in our binary evolution model where total binary lifetimes around ∼ 6–8 Gyr combined with fairly e ffi cient small-separation hardening ( −0.5 ≲ νinner ≲ −0.2) weaken the GWB—through the mass filtration imposed by long lifetimes and the reduced source counts imposed by both parameters—enough that a CW would likely have been detectable above it. CW nondetection in-stead favors the broad region below and left of this zone, spanning the short-to-intermediate lifetimes and steeper νinner , where e ffi cient large-separation harden-ing allows many sources across all masses to con-tribute to the background. A second, smaller allowed corner appears at the longest lifetimes and flattest 

νinner , where CWs are too weak to detect even with-out much GWB competition. The GWB posteriors ex-clude this corner, so the joint posteriors favor shorter lifetime and steeper νinner than the GWB-only posteri-ors of NG15astro. 3. Weighting the GWB posterior chain of samples by the nCW likelihoods slightly tightens the constraints on most parameters in our joint posterior. The joint poste-riors push several parameters tighter against their prior edges: toward higher GSMF normalization, shorter binary lifetime, and lower MBH –Mbulge scatter. The nCW constraints are weaker than those of the GWB, but they add complementary information, breaking the mass–number degeneracy. These constraints could strengthen if nondetection continues. 4. The binary properties of detectable CWs most consis-tent with our current CW upper limits, weighted by their S /Ns, are chirp masses of Mc ∼ 10 9.5 M⊙, lumi-nosity distances of dL ∼ 700 Mpc, and frequencies of 

∼4 nHz, coinciding with the NG15cw low-frequency candidate. In contrast, the S /N-weighted GWB pos-teriors favor more massive ( Mc ∼ 10 9.7 M⊙), more distant ( dL ∼ 1200 Mpc), higher-frequency ( ∼6 nHz) sources, and the joint posteriors fall near the GWB pre-dictions, reflecting the relative weakness of the current nCW constraints ( Mc ∼ 10 9.6 M⊙, dL ∼ 1300 Mpc, 

f ∼ 6 nHz). ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work of A.As., R.B., R.C., X.S., J.T., and D.W. is partly supported by the George and Hannah Bolinger Memo-rial Fund in the College of Science at Oregon State Univer-sity. A.As. gratefully acknowledges the support of the Moore Foundation. L.B. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under award AST-2509457. P.R.B. is supported by the Science and Technology Facilities Coun-cil, grant number ST /W000946 /1. S.B. gratefully acknowl-edges the support of a Sloan Fellowship, and the support of NSF under award #1815664. M.C. acknowledges support by the European Union (ERC, MMMonsters, 101117624). S.C. received support from an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Grant (AAG) award number 2511105 during this work. Sup-port for this work was provided by the NSF through the Grote Reber Fellowship Program administered by Associated Uni-versities, Inc. /National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Pul-sar research at UBC is supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant and by CIFAR. K.C. and M.S.T. are supported by a UBC Four Year Fellowship. M.E.D. acknowledges sup-port from the Naval Research Laboratory by NASA under contract S-15633Y. T.D. and M.T.L. received support from an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Grant (AAG) award number 2511107 during this work. E.C.F. is supported by NASA under award number 80GSFC24M0006. E.C.G. is supported by a UC Berkeley Graduate Division Mentored Research Award. K.A.G. and S.R.T. acknowledge support from an NSF CAREER award #2146016. D.C.G. is sup-ported by NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Grant (AAG) award #2406919. A.D.J. acknowledges support from the Cal-tech and Jet Propulsion Laboratory President’s and Director’s Research and Development Fund. A.D.J. acknowledges sup-port from the Sloan Foundation. N.La. was supported by the Vanderbilt Initiative in Data Intensive Astrophysics (VIDA) Fellowship. Part of this research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (80NM0018D0004). D.R.L. and M.A.M. are supported by NSF #1458952. M.A.M. is supported by NSF 22 #2009425. C.M.F.M. was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants No. NSF PHY-1748958 and NASA LPS 80NSSC24K0440. C.M.F.M. also thanks the Center for Computational Astrophysics (CCA) of the Flat-iron Institute for support. The Flatiron Institute is supported by the Simons Foundation. A.Mi. acknowledges support from a Royal Society University Research Fellowship (URF-R1-251896). The Dunlap Institute is funded by an endow-ment established by the David Dunlap family and the Univer-sity of Toronto. K.D.O. was supported in part by NSF Grant No. 2207267. T.T.P. acknowledges support from the Ex-tragalactic Astrophysics Research Group at E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and University, funded by the E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and Research Network (ELKH), which was used during the development of this re-search. P.P. and S.R.T. acknowledge support from NSF AST-2007993. H.A.R. is supported by NSF Partnerships for Re-search and Education in Physics (PREP) award No. 2216793. S.M.R. and I.H.S. are CIFAR Fellows. Portions of this work performed at NRL were supported by ONR 6.1 basic re-search funding. J.D.R. also acknowledges support from start-up funds from Texas Tech University. S.C.S. and S.J.V. are supported by NSF award PHY-2011772. J.S. is supported by an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellow-ship under award AST-2202388, and acknowledges previous support by the NSF under award 1847938. J.P.W.V. acknowl-edges support from NSF AccelNet award No. 2114721. O.Y. is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-2139292. The authors disclose the use of Claude (Anthropic; Claude Opus and Claude Fable model family, 2025–2026) as a supporting tool for code development, debugging, and language editing during manuscript preparation. All analyses, results, and sci-entific conclusions were verified by the authors. 

# Software: astropy ( Astropy Collaboration et al. 2018), ceffyl (W. G. Lamb et al. 2023), cython (S. Behnel et al. 2011), holodeck (L. Z. Kelley et al. in preparation), 

kalepy (L. Z. Kelley 2021), matplotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), numpy (S. van der Walt et al. 2011), pint (J. Luo et al. 2018; A. Susobhanan et al. 2024), pta replicator (B. B´ ecsy et al. 2025), QuickCW (B. B´ ecsy et al. 2022a), scipy 

(P. Virtanen et al. 2020) AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS E.C.G. was the primary lead for this project. E.C.G., K.G., and L.Z.K. conceptualized this project, with advising and computational support from L.B. E.C.G. conducted the anal-yses and manuscript writing, with ongoing input from K.G., for all components of this work except the dL nCW method, which was developed and written up by P.X.T. and B.B. J.W.L. and S.R.T. contributed suggestions during the editing phase. Additional NANOGrav members are listed in alpha-betical order; each contributed to the collaboration-wide en-deavors underpinning this work, including pulsar timing and data processing, the NG15 GWB and CW analyses, and soft-ware development. REFERENCES 

> Agarwal, N., Agazie, G., Amosso, A., et al. 2026a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.28554, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2606.28554 Agarwal, N., Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., et al. 2026b, ApJL, 998, L11, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /ae3719 Agazie, G., Alam, M. F., Anumarlapudi, A., et al. 2023a, ApJL, 951, L9, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /acda9a Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023b, ApJL, 951, L8, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /acdac6 Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023c, ApJL, 952, L37, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /ace18b Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023d, ApJL, 951, L50, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /ace18a Antoniadis, J., Arumugam, P., Arumugam, S., et al. 2023a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.16226, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2306.16226 Antoniadis, J., Babak, S., Bak Nielsen, A. S., et al. 2023b, A&A, 678, A48, doi: 10.1051 /0004-6361 /202346841 Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847 /1538-3881 /aabc4f B´ ecsy, B., & Cornish, N. J. 2020, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 37, 135011, doi: 10.1088 /1361-6382 /ab8bbd B´ ecsy, B., Cornish, N. J., & Digman, M. C. 2022a, PhRvD, 105, 122003, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRevD.105.122003 B´ ecsy, B., Cornish, N. J., & Kelley, L. Z. 2022b, ApJ, 941, 119, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /aca1b2 B´ ecsy, B., Hazboun, J., & Johnson, A. 2025, pta replicator,, GitHub repository https: // github.com /bencebecsy /pta replicator Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., & Rees, M. J. 1980, Nature, 287, 307, doi: 10.1038 /287307a0 Behnel, S., Bradshaw, R., Citro, C., et al. 2011, Computing in Science and Engineering, 13, 31, doi: 10.1109 /MCSE.2010.118 Binney, J., & Tremaine, S. 1987, Galactic dynamics Blecha, L. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2608.06269, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2608.06269 Bluck, A. F. L., Mendel, J. T., Ellison, S. L., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 599, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stu594 Bonetti, M., Sesana, A., Barausse, E., & Haardt, F. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2599, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /sty874 Boylan-Kolchin, M., Ma, C.-P., & Quataert, E. 2008, MNRAS, 383, 93, doi: 10.1111 /j.1365-2966.2007.12530.x

23 

Burke-Spolaor, S., Taylor, S. R., Charisi, M., et al. 2019, A&A Rv, 27, 5, doi: 10.1007 /s00159-019-0115-7 Chandrasekhar, S. 1943, ApJ, 97, 255, doi: 10.1086 /144517 Chen, S., Sesana, A., & Conselice, C. J. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 401, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stz1722 Conselice, C. J., Mundy, C. J., Ferreira, L., & Duncan, K. 2022, ApJ, 940, 168, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ac9b1a Criswell, A. W., Banagiri, S., Delfavero, V., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.03390, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2604.03390 de Nicola, S., Thomas, J., Saglia, R. P., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2512.04178, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2512.04178 Driver, S. P., Bellstedt, S., Robotham, A. S. G., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 513, 439, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stac472 Ellis, J. A., Jenet, F. A., & McLaughlin, M. A. 2012, ApJ, 753, 96, doi: 10.1088 /0004-637X /753 /2/96 Ellis, J. A., Vallisneri, M., Taylor, S. R., & Baker, P. T. 2020, ENTERPRISE: Enhanced Numerical Toolbox Enabling a Robust PulsaR Inference SuitE,, Zenodo doi: 10.5281 /zenodo.4059815 Enoki, M., & Nagashima, M. 2007, Progress of Theoretical Physics, 117, 241, doi: 10.1143 /PTP.117.241 Finn, L. S., & Thorne, K. S. 2000, Phys. Rev. D, 62, 124021, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRevD.62.124021 Gardiner, E. C., B´ ecsy, B., Kelley, L. Z., & Cornish, N. J. 2025, ApJ, 988, 222, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ade4c2 Gardiner, E. C., Kelley, L. Z., Lemke, A.-M., & Mitridate, A. 2024, ApJ, 965, 164, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ad2be8 Goncharov, B., Sato-Polito, G., Bi, X., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.18241, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2606.18241 Gundersen, A., & Cornish, N. J. 2025, PhRvD, 112, 083035, doi: 10.1103 /5xh1-kgtk Harris, C. J., G¨ ultekin, K., & Blecha, L. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2601.07762, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2601.07762 Holley-Bockelmann, K., Khan, F. M., Williams, I., et al. 2025, ApJL, 995, L32, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /ae1ccd Houlden, B., Thrane, E., & Auchettl, K. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2608.25715, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2608.25715 Huber, M. C., Comerford, J. M., & Simon, J. 2026, ApJ, 1008, 204, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ae975b Huber, M. C., Simon, J., & Comerford, J. M. 2025, ApJ, 988, 90, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ade30a Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90 Iemoto, K., Goncharov, B., Sato-Polito, G., & Bi, X. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2609.07703. https: // arxiv.org /abs /2609.07703 Izquierdo-Villalba, D., Sesana, A., Bonoli, S., & Colpi, M. 2022, MNRAS, 509, 3488, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stab3239 Kelley, L. Z. 2021, Journal of Open Source Software, 6, 2784, doi: 10.21105 /joss.02784 Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., & Hernquist, L. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 3131, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stw2452 Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., Hernquist, L., Sesana, A., & Taylor, S. R. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 964, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /sty689 Kelley, L. Z., et al. in preparation, ApJL Khan, F. M., Berczik, P., & Just, A. 2018, A&A, 615, A71, doi: 10.1051 /0004-6361 /201730489 Khan, F. M., Fiacconi, D., Mayer, L., Berczik, P., & Just, A. 2016, ApJ, 828, 73, doi: 10.3847 /0004-637X /828 /2/73 Kormendy, J., & Ho, L. C. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511, doi: 10.1146 /annurev-astro-082708-101811 Kullback, S., & Leibler, R. A. 1951, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22, 79. http: // www.jstor.org /stable /2236703 Laal, N., Taylor, S. R., Matt, C., & G¨ ultekin, K. 2026, ApJ, 1004, 90, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ae6cea Laal, N., Taylor, S. R., Kelley, L. Z., et al. 2025, ApJ, 982, 55, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /adb4ef Lacey, C., & Cole, S. 1993, MNRAS, 262, 627, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /262.3.627 Lamb, W. G., Taylor, S. R., & van Haasteren, R. 2023, Physical Review D, 108, 103019 Lamb, W. G., Wachter, J. M., Mitridate, A., et al. 2026, PhRvD, 113, 123065, doi: 10.1103 /96zk-qtck Lang, P., Wuyts, S., Somerville, R. S., et al. 2014, ApJ, 788, 11, doi: 10.1088 /0004-637X /788 /1/11 Lapi, A., Shankar, F., Bosi, M., et al. 2026, JCAP, 2026, 001, doi: 10.1088 /1475-7516 /2026 /02 /001 Lauer, T. R., Tremaine, S., Richstone, D., & Faber, S. M. 2007, ApJ, 670, 249, doi: 10.1086 /522083 Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2020, ApJ, 893, 111, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ab7e27 Liepold, E. R., & Ma, C.-P. 2024, ApJL, 971, L29, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /ad66b8 Luo, J., Ransom, S. M., Demorest, P., et al. 2018, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 231, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #231, 453.09 Matt, C., G¨ ultekin, K., & Simon, J. 2023, MNRAS, 524, 4403, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stad2146 Matt, C., G¨ ultekin, K., Kelley, L. Z., et al. 2026a, ApJ, 997, 188, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ae2480 Matt, C., G¨ ultekin, K., Agazie, G., et al. 2026b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.11167, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2603.11167 Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Madau, P., et al. 2007, Science, 316, 1874, doi: 10.1126 /science.1141858 McConnell, N. J., & Ma, C.-P. 2013, ApJ, 764, 184, doi: 10.1088 /0004-637X /764 /2/184 Merritt, D., & Milosavljevi´ c, M. 2005, Living Reviews in Relativity, 8, 8, doi: 10.12942 /lrr-2005-8 Miles, M. T., Shannon, R. M., Reardon, D. J., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 536, 1489, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stae2571 24 

Milosavljevi´ c, M., & Merritt, D. 2003, ApJ, 596, 860, doi: 10.1086 /378086 Mingarelli, C. M. F., Lazio, T. J. W., Sesana, A., et al. 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 886, doi: 10.1038 /s41550-017-0299-6 Ostriker, E. C. 1999, ApJ, 513, 252, doi: 10.1086 /306858 Peters, P. C. 1964, Physical Review, 136, 1224, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRev.136.B1224 Quinlan, G. D. 1996, NewA, 1, 35, doi: 10.1016 /S1384-1076(96)00003-6 Reardon, D. J., Zic, A., Shannon, R. M., et al. 2023, ApJL, 951, L6, doi: 10.3847 /2041-8213 /acdd02 Richstone, D., Ajhar, E. A., Bender, R., et al. 1998, Nature, 395, A14, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.astro-ph /9810378 Rodriguez-Gomez, V., Genel, S., Vogelsberger, M., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 49, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stv264 Rosado, P. A., Sesana, A., & Gair, J. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2417, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stv1098 Sato-Polito, G., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2025a, PhRvD, 111, 023043, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRevD.111.023043 Sato-Polito, G., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2025b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2509.08041, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2509.08041 Sato-Polito, G., Zaldarriaga, M., & Quataert, E. 2024, PhRvD, 110, 063020, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRevD.110.063020 Sesana, A., & Khan, F. M. 2015, MNRAS, 454, L66, doi: 10.1093 /mnrasl /slv131 Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., & Colacino, C. N. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 192, doi: 10.1111 /j.1365-2966.2008.13682.x Siwek, M., Weinberger, R., & Hernquist, L. 2023, MNRAS, 522, 2707, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stad1131 Snyder, G. F., Lotz, J. M., Rodriguez-Gomez, V., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 207, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /stx487 Soltan, A. 1982, MNRAS, 200, 115, doi: 10.1093 /mnras /200.1.115 Susobhanan, A., Kaplan, D. L., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2024, ApJ, 971, 150, doi: 10.3847 /1538-4357 /ad59f7 Taylor, S. R. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2105.13270, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2105.13270 Taylor, S. R., Huerta, E. A., Gair, J. R., & McWilliams, S. T. 2016, ApJ, 817, 70, doi: 10.3847 /0004-637X /817 /1/70 Tomson, S. M., van Haasteren, R., & Goncharov, B. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2609.09086, doi: 10.48550 /arXiv.2609.09086 Turgeon, P. X., et al. in preparation van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CoRR, 1102.1523. https: // arxiv.org /abs /1102.1523 Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038 /s41592-019-0686-2 Xu, H., Chen, S., Guo, Y., et al. 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 075024, doi: 10.1088 /1674-4527 /acdfa5 Xue, X., Pan, Z., & Dai, L. 2025, PhRvD, 111, 043022, doi: 10.1103 /PhysRevD.111.043022 Yu, Q. 2002, MNRAS, 331, 935, doi: 10.1046 /j.1365-8711.2002.05242.x