Title: An "inside-out" approach to modeling supermassive black hole binary inspiral

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06269v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 01:20:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 7, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

An “inside-out” approach to modeling supermassive black hole binary inspiral 

Laura Blecha 1

> 1University of Florida, Department of Physics

ABSTRACT The inspiral and merger of two supermassive black holes (SMBHs) releases immense energy in low-frequency gravitational waves (GWs). Recent pulsar timing array (PTA) observations of the stochastic nHz GW background (GWB) are consistent with a SMBH binary origin. GW data from PTAs and from the upcoming Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) can probe late-stage binary evolution where electromagnetic constraints are scarce. However, the complexity of the relevant astrophysics necessitates a well optimized approach. I argue that a key physical quantity to constrain with PTAs is the orbital semi-major axis at which binary inspiral transitions from the astrophysical to the GW-dominated regime ( aGW ). This quantity should be treated as a free parameter in analysis of the GWB. Using this premise, I present a simple analytic framework for modeling SMBH binary inspiral in an “inside-out” fashion. At orbital separations slightly larger than aGW , a power-law scaling for the astrophysical inspiral timescale is assumed, while the outermost phase (prior to the PTA regime) is simply modeled via a delay time. I show that the GWB spectral shape and amplitude are most sensitive to aGW (normalized to 10 9 M⊙, equal-mass binaries and expressed in gravitational units), with weaker dependence on the inner power-law index and the outer delay time. The GWB is largely insensitive to the mass and mass-ratio scaling of aGW and to the boundary between the inner and outer astrophysical inspiral regimes. I compare with models for gas- and stellar-driven binary inspiral and discuss implications for LISA and for GW source parameter inference. 

Keywords: Supermassive black holes (1663) — Gravitational wave astronomy (675) — Gravitational wave sources (677) 

1. INTRODUCTION Supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHBs) form af-ter the merger of two galaxies and should therefore be common throughout the Universe. However, elec-tromagnetic (EM) evidence for SMBHBs remains very scarce (e.g., S. Burke-Spolaor 2011; M. Eracleous et al. 2012; M. Charisi et al. 2016; A. Sesana et al. 2018; T. Bogdanovi´ c et al. 2022). Pulsar timing arrays (PTAs) recently found strong evidence for a stochas-tic, nanoHertz gravitational-wave background (GWB; G. Agazie et al. 2023a; EPTA Collaboration et al. 2023; D. J. Reardon et al. 2023; H. Xu et al. 2023) that is con-sistent with a cosmic population of SMBHBs (G. Agazie et al. 2023b; EPTA Collaboration et al. 2024). Using the 15-yr data set of the North Ameri-can Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav G. Agazie et al. 2023a), G. Agazie et al. 

> Email: lblecha@ufl.edu

(2023b, hereafter NG15Astro) presented constraints on SMBHBs. Although this marks a major advance in understanding SMBH evolution, significant challenges remain. The NANOGrav 15-yr data appear to favor more massive and/or numerous SMBHBs than inferred from EM observations of the galaxy stellar mass func-tion (GSMF), the SMBH-galaxy scaling relations, and the galaxy merger rate. Numerous explanations have been proposed, including revisions to the high-mass tail of the GSMF (G. Sato-Polito et al. 2023; E. R. Liepold & C.-P. Ma 2024), redshift evolution of the SMBH-galaxy relations (C. Matt et al. 2026a,b), and GWs arising from physics beyond the Standard Model (A. Afzal et al. 2023). In addition, the NG15Astro parameter poste-riors are broad and in some cases prior-dominated. N. Laal et al. (2025) recently developed a normalizing flow emulator that outperforms previous methods for con-necting the GWB to underlying physical models. Fu-ture PTA data sets that can better characterize the nHz GWB, in conjunction with improvements to SMBHB population models, will enhance the physical informa-arXiv:2608.06269v1 [astro-ph.HE] 6 Aug 2026 2 L. Blecha 

tion extracted from PTA observations. Low-frequency GW observations are uniquely well suited to probe late-stage SMBHB inspiral and are thus complementary to EM constraints. The focus of this work is designing a practical approach to modeling SMBHB inspiral that is optimized for parameter inference with PTAs. A key issue is the highly uncertain timescales for SMBHBs to form, inspiral through the PTA frequency band (where they are powerful GW emitters), and merge. Central to this is the problem of dynamic range—the roughly ten orders of magnitude in separa-tion that SMBHs must traverse from galaxy infall to SMBH merger. SMBHs follow their host galaxies as a galaxy merger begins on ∼ 100s of kpc scales. After the galaxy nuclei coalesce, SMBHs inspiral further via dy-namical friction until they form a gravitationally-bound system at separations ≲ 1 pc (for low-mass SMBHBs) to ≳ 10-100 pc (for massive PTA binaries). At this stage, the time for the SMBHB to merge via GW emis-sion alone is much greater than a Hubble time ( tHub ), even for massive binaries. Further interactions with the astrophysical environment are needed to reach the GW regime on ∼mpc scales. M. C. Begelman et al. (1980) showed that SMBHB merger timescales depend strongly on the stellar and gaseous environment of their host galaxies, and that some SMBHBs might “stall” at ∼ parsec (pc) scales for more than tHub —the so-called “final-parsec problem.” While many viable solutions to the final-parsec prob-lem have been presented (e.g., A. Escala et al. 2005; K. Holley-Bockelmann & S. Sigurdsson 2006; P. Berczik et al. 2006; L. Mayer et al. 2007; F. M. Khan et al. 2013; K. Holley-Bockelmann & F. M. Khan 2015), SMBHB inspiral rates remain highly uncertain and could range from ≲ 10 6 yr to ≫ tHub (e.g., M. Volonteri et al. 2003; A. Sesana et al. 2009; E. Barausse 2012; M. Colpi 2014; L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017a; A. Ricarte & P. Natarajan 2018; M. L. Katz et al. 2020). This limits our ability to constrain SMBHB populations using PTAs and to make predictions for the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA P. Amaro-Seoane et al. 2023). Planned for launch in the next decade, LISA will be sensitive to mHz GWs from mergers of lower-mass SMBHBs out to z ∼ 20 (P. Amaro-Seoane et al. 2017). SMBHB inspiral is often called SMBHB hardening, and a “hard” binary is one for which vorb exceeds the stellar velocity dispersion σ∗, such that individual stel-lar scattering events will shrink the binary orbit. Fol-lowing convention, I use “inspiral” and “hardening” in-terchangeably to refer to the shrinking of binary orbits, regardless of whether stars or other processes drive the evolution. The simplest SMBHB evolution models as-sume that all SMBHBs efficiently reach the GW regime after galaxy mergers, through unspecified means, and that only GW emission drives SMBHB inspiral through the relevant GW frequency bands (e.g., E. S. Phinney 2001; J. S. B. Wyithe & A. Loeb 2003; A. Sesana et al. 2008; E. Roebber et al. 2016). The galaxy merger rate can be taken from a semi-analytic model or derived from empirical constraints. Studies of astrophysically driven SMBHB inspiral of-ten focus on either gaseous or stellar processes. Colli-sionless N -body simulations model SMBHB evolution via scattering events with stars in the binary’s “loss cone.” Stalling occurs if stars are ejected from the loss cone faster than they are replenished, in the absence of other hardening mechanisms (e.g., G. D. Quinlan 1996; Q. Yu 2002; D. Merritt & M. Milosavljevi´ c 2005; A. Sesana et al. 2006). Triaxiality, asymmetry, and rota-tion of stellar potentials can refill the loss cone and drive SMBHBs to the GW regime (e.g., P. Berczik et al. 2006; K. Holley-Bockelmann & S. Sigurdsson 2006; F. M. Khan et al. 2011, 2013; K. Holley-Bockelmann & F. M. Khan 2015; A. Gualandris et al. 2017). A similarly rich body of literature explores SMBHB inspiral driven by circumbinary gas disks, often using (magneto)hydrodynamics simulations (e.g., P. J. Ar-mitage & P. Natarajan 2002; A. Escala et al. 2005; L. Mayer et al. 2007; A. I. MacFadyen & M. Milosavljevi´ c2008). The efficiency of circumbinary disk hardening is sensitive to the detailed structure and properties of the accretion disk, as well as binary mass ratio and eccen-tricity (e.g., J.-M. Shi et al. 2012; B. D. Farris et al. 2014; D. Lai & D. J. Mu˜ noz 2023). Binaries may even undergo “softening” (orbital expansion) rather than hardening in some cases (e.g., D. J. Mu˜ noz et al. 2019; M. S. L. Moody et al. 2019; D. J. Mu˜ noz et al. 2020; C. Tiede et al. 2020). Simulations also show the existence of an equilibrium or-bital eccentricity that depends on mass ratio (C. Roedig et al. 2011; D. J. D’Orazio & P. C. Duffell 2021; J. Zrake et al. 2021; M. Siwek et al. 2023a). In addition to their dynamical effects, circumbinary gas disks can fuel gas accretion onto SMBHs, producing electromagnetic (EM) counterparts to GW sources (e.g., M. Milosavljevi´ c & E. S. Phinney 2005; S. C. Noble et al. 2012; Y. Tang et al. 2018; T. Bogdanovi´ c et al. 2022). Detection of a multi-messenger SMBHB system would have far-reaching implications for astrophysics and cos-mology (e.g., P. Amaro-Seoane et al. 2023). In unequal-mass systems, the secondary (less massive) SMBH ac-cretes preferentially more, driving the binary mass ratio toward unity and increasing the GW signal (e.g., B. D. Farris et al. 2014; P. C. Duffell et al. 2020; M. Siwek et al. 2023b; J. M. Comerford & J. Simon 2025). This An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 3can also enhance EM variability signatures associated with binary orbital motion (e.g., D. J. D’Orazio et al. 2015; P. C. Duffell et al. 2020). Triple SMBH interactions provide another channel for SMBHB hardening, as chaotic or resonant three-body interactions can greatly reduce the merger time (L. Hoff-man & A. Loeb 2007; M. Bonetti et al. 2016, 2018a,b, 2019). Even if all binaries stall, M. Bonetti et al. (2018b) find that SMBH inspiral mediated by triple interactions should produce an observable GWB. Triple interactions and GW recoil can also eject SMBHs from galactic nu-clei, further complicating the association between galaxy mergers and SMBH mergers (e.g., M. Volonteri 2007; L. Hoffman & A. Loeb 2007; K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. 2008; L. Blecha et al. 2011; P. Satheesh et al. 2025). Ideally, cosmological SMBHB population models will account for multiple hardening processes, including dy-namical friction, stellar scattering, gas drag, and GW emission. Such frameworks have been constructed using SMBHB host properties from either simulations (e.g., L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017a,b; M. L. Katz et al. 2020; K. Li et al. 2023; M. Siwek et al. 2024; C. J. Harris et al. 2026) or semi-analytic models (e.g., D. Izquierdo-Villalba et al. 2022; S. Bonoli et al. 2025, these also in-clude SMBH triples). Hydrodynamics simulations pro-vide detailed information about galactic environment and internal structure, but they are computationally ex-pensive, subject to resolution limits, and rely on sub-grid or post-processing SMBH prescriptions. Semi-analytic models are much more computationally efficient but are even more reliant on semi-analytic prescriptions for the processes governing galaxy and SMBH evolution. Moreover, even simple SMBHB models have many free parameters. Those controlling large-scale evolution can be constrained with EM observations (e.g., the GSMF, galaxy merger rates, & BH-galaxy relations), but obser-vations of bound SMBHBs are very scarce (C. Rodriguez et al. 2006; S. Burke-Spolaor 2011). Thus, SMBHB evo-lution through the PTA frequency band is the regime that is least accessible to EM observations. The PTA evidence for a stochastic, nHz GW back-ground provides an unprecedented opportunity to char-acterize the SMBHB population. In NG15Astro, the SMBHB population synthesis code holodeck was used to analyze the NANOGrav 15-yr data set. Six param-eters were varied: two controlling the GSMF, two con-trolling the MBH -Mbulge relation, and two controlling SMBHB inspiral. The need for many realizations of SMBHB populations in order to build reliable param-eter posteriors, and the need to avoid overfitting the data, places stringent constraints on the complexity of viable SMBHB inspiral models (N. Laal et al. 2026). NG15Astro introduced an analytic fixed-timescale, double-power-law model for SMBHB hardening (here-after the “2PL” hardening model), motivated by the simulation-based models of L. Z. Kelley et al. (2017a,b, 2018). The disadvantage of this approach is that the fixed total timescale inextricably ties small-scale inspi-ral to evolution on much larger scales, well outside the PTA regime. More broadly, careful selection of parameters to which PTAs are most sensitive will be crucial to maximize SMBHB constraints from the GWB. I argue for an approach that focuses on SMBHB hardening at small scales, corresponding to observable GW frequencies. Ipresent an analytic model for SMBHB hardening that achieves this goal while maintaining similar form and simplicity as the 2PL model of NG15Astro. I highlight a quantity to which the GWB amplitude and spectral shape are particularly sensitive: aGW , the orbital semi-major axis at which binary inspiral transitions from the astrophysical to the GW-dominated regime. I argue that 

aGW should be treated as a free parameter to be con-strained with PTAs. This model centers on the fact that the innermost SMBHB inspiral regime determines how much GW en-ergy is emitted at each PTA frequency, while the evo-lution at larger separations determines which binaries reach the PTA regime, and when. Because I treat this “outer” inspiral regime simply as a means of connecting the “inner” regime to a cosmological SMBHB popula-tion at large scales, I refer to this as an “inside-out” model for SMBHB inspiral. This paper is organized as follows. In Sections 2.1 & 2.2, respectively, I review relevant aspects of ana-lytic prescriptions for SMBHB inspiral via GW emis-sion only and using the 2PL model. Section 2.3 presents the inside-out SMBHB inspiral model and describes the model variants used in this work. Section 2.4 out-lines criteria that limit the physical regions of parameter space. Sections 3.1 & 3.2 present the results for two fidu-cial models, and Sections 3.3 & 3.4 describe model de-pendence on aGW . Section 3.5 describes dependence on the power-law scaling of the inner astrophysical harden-ing rate, νin , while Section 3.6 discusses the parameters that connect the inner and outer astrophysical regimes. Section 3.7 discusses connections to models for gas- and stellar-driven hardening. Caveats and applications be-yond PTA science are discussed in Section 4, and I sum-marize and conclude in Section 5. Throughout this pa-per a WMAP9 cosmology is assumed with Ω m = 0 .288, Ωb = 0 .0472, and H0 = 0 .6933 km s −1 Mpc −1.4 L. Blecha  

> 2.

ANALYTIC PRESCRIPTIONS FOR SMBH BINARY HARDENING I summarize relevant aspects of two analytic prescrip-tions for SMBHB evolution and then present the inside-out hardening model that is central to this work. 2.1. GW-only binary hardening 

Although it is well-known that SMBHBs must inter-act with their astrophysical environment to reach the GW regime, the simplicity of modeling SMBHB inspi-ral via GW emission alone makes this a widely used method in the literature. Such calculations follow the logic of E. S. Phinney (2001) starting from a number density of merger remnants, using the fact that the GW energy emitted from all mergers must sum to the cos-mic GW energy density (per log frequency interval). This is the most essentially “inside-out” approach to modeling SMBHB hardening, and it is the origin of the hc(f ) ∝ f −2/3 power-law scaling of the character-istic GW strain used in idealized models of the GWB. (The corresponding pulsar-timing-residual power spec-tral density scales as f −13 /3.) This approach does not require knowledge of how SMBHBs evolve to the GW regime, except that they must reach it much faster than via GWs alone. Because it works backwards from a merger event rate, however, this approach breaks down if the GWB includes emis-sion from SMBHBs that will not merge by z = 0. In other words, binaries cannot contribute to the merger number density if they enter the low-frequency edge of the observed GWB with a time to merger of τGW > t Hub 

(or more precisely, if they have τGW > t look (z), the look-back time for a binary forming at redshift z). A GWB calculation that includes GW emission from such bina-ries is thus inherently inconsistent. It is useful to quantify the limits in which this GW-only calculation for SMBHB inspiral remains self-consistent at least within the range of observable PTA frequencies—arguably the minimal requirement for a valid “inside-out” model of SMBHB hardening for PTA data. Consider a circular SMBHB with total mass 

M = m1 +m2, mass ratio q ≡ m2/m 1 < 1, and symmet-ric mass ratio η ≡ q/ (1 + q)2 that has an initial separa-tion a and is emitting GWs at a frequency fem = 2 forb .Driven by GW emission only, this binary will inspiral to merger within a time (P. C. Peters 1964) 

τGW = 5a4c5

64 G3M 3η

= 3 .26 × 10 4 yr M −5/39 (4 η)−1

 fem 

yr −1

−8/3

, (1)          

> Figure 1. Minimum required mass for circular SMBHBs to merge by z= 0, starting from zem (fobs ,min ), via GW emission alone. Curves are shown for fobs ,min = (15 yr) −1, (20 yr) −1,& (100 yr) −1. They indicate the SMBHB masses that would be included in a self-consistent GWB calculation based on a SMBHB merger rate as in E. S. Phinney (2001), if all binaries are evolved from the low-frequency edge of the PTA band via GW emission alone. Lower-mass binaries cannot con-tribute to a self-consistent GWB calculation any frequency
> > f obs ,min , unless astrophysical hardening is included along with GW-driven hardening.

where M9 ≡ M/ (10 9M⊙). Thus, circular SMBHBs at a redshift zem will merge by z = 0 only if 

M > 5.1 × 10 7M⊙

(4 η)3/5

 tHub 

tlook (zem )

3/5 1 + zem 

fobs /(20 yr) −1

8/5

,

(2) where tlook (zem ) is the lookback time for a source at redshift zem , and fobs ≡ fem (1 + z). Setting fobs =

fobs ,min = 1 /T obs in Equation 2 provides an estimate of the binary masses that could be self-consistently in-cluded in a (circular) GW-only inspiral model for a GWB observed over a time Tobs . Figure 1 shows the minimum mass versus redshift for Tobs = 15, 20, & 100 yr. Each curve has a minimum at z = 0 .39 and ap-proaches infinity at z → 0 and z → ∞ . At z = 0 .39, 

M = 1 .7 × 10 8M⊙ is the minimum binary mass (for 

q = 1) that can start from fobs ,min = (20 yr) −1 and merge by z = 0. (The minimum mass for such binaries with q = 0 .1 is 3 .4 × 10 8M⊙.) Below this mass, circular binaries driven by GW emission alone, from an orbital period of τorb = 2 /f obs , cannot contribute to the GW-only GWB calculation at any frequency, or to SMBHB merger rates. Put another way, if circular binaries below this mass contribute nonnegligibly to the GWB, even just at the highest frequencies, they must pass through the observable lower-frequency bands faster than if they were driven by GW emission alone. An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 5In practice, GW-only calculations of the GWB of-ten use the number density of galaxy mergers, rather than the SMBH mergers themselves. If no additional delay is imposed, this means that binaries are brought to the GW regime on artificially short timescales. Self-consistency within the PTA regime in this case requires only that SMBHBs reach the high-frequency edge of the PTA band by z = 0, rather than reaching merger by 

z = 0. However, the difference in the constraints im-posed by Equation 2 is negligible, because τGW will al-ways be much smaller at the high-frequency edge of the PTA band than at the low-frequency edge. In NG15Astro, binaries ≲ a few ×10 8M⊙ are found to contribute < 1% to the high-frequency GWB (weighted by h2 

> c

). This indicates that a GW-emission-only model for SMBHB hardening can be considered a valid model for current GWB data, insofar as precision at the ∼ 1% level is not required. However, such a model cannot be used for lower-mass SMBH evolution (i.e., LISA predic-tions using PTA data). As the observation time of PTAs increases, the mass threshold for valid GW-only hardening models will in-crease ∝ T 8/5obs . A GWB calculation using GW-only in-spiral for a hypothetical 100-yr PTA data set would be self-consistent only for M > 2.3 × 10 9M⊙ (with a higher mass threshold for q < 1 or z̸ = 0 .39). In other words, a 100-yr PTA data set would require a SMBHB model that either a) includes astrophysically driven hardening mechanisms, or b) has zero GW contribution at any fre-quency from ≲ few ×10 9M⊙ SMBHs, if only GW emis-sion is assumed to drive SMBHB hardening within the PTA band. Eccentric binaries merge faster and emit GWs at higher-frequency harmonics than assumed in Equation 1, but because GW emission efficiently circu-larizes binary orbits, invoking nonnegligible eccentricity again requires astrophysical hardening processes. The above discussion highlights that current PTA ob-servations are to a small extent already pushing beyond the regime in which the E. S. Phinney (2001) GWB calculation using only GW-driven SMBHB inspiral is self-consistent, and the magnitude of this issue will only grow with time. This is separate from the limitations of a pure power-law GWB model arising from the discrete nature of sources and from the intrinsic non-Gaussianity of the GWB signal (A. Sesana et al. 2008, 2009; V. Ravi et al. 2012). It is also separate from, but related to, the important question of how astrophysical hardening modifies the shape and amplitude of the GWB spec-trum, and it further motivates the need for a SMBHB hardening model that accounts for astrophysics without introducing an intractable number of free parameters. 2.2. The 2PL hardening model 

Tracing SMBHB evolution from galaxy merger to SMBHB merger vastly increases model complexity. The SMBHB hardening prescription used in NG15Astro is a simple parameterization of this kind of “outside-in” model (based on L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017a,b), and I briefly review it here. The GW-only hardening rate is (P. C. Peters 1964): ˙aGW ≡ da dt GW 

= − 64 G3

5c5

ηM 3

a3 g(e), (3) 

g(e) = (1 − e2)−7/2



1 + 73 24 e2 + 37 96 e4



. (4) The astrophysically driven hardening is prescribed by the phenomenological 2PL model (Equation 5), with power-law indices νout and νin , respectively, describing the dominant behavior at separations above and below a characteristic value rchar :˙a2PL = H

 archar 

1−νin 

1 + archar 

νin −νout 

. (5) The total hardening rate is the sum of the GW and the phenomenological hardening rates (Eqn. 6): ˙a = ˙ a2PL + ˙ aGW . (6) One can also define thard ≡ a/ (− ˙a) as the instanta-neous hardening timescale. Throughout this work, I use 

thard to express instantaneous hardening timescales and 

τ to express integrated inspiral times. I also assume that ˙ a is always negative—i.e., that binary orbits always shrink (harden) rather than expand (soften). Thus, larger hardening rates (faster inspiral) correspond to more negative values of ˙ a. Because I extensively discuss the maximum physical hardening rates, I use the nota-tion | ˙a| as needed to avoid confusion. At a ≪ rchar , the hardening timescale thard ,2PL ∝ aνin , and at a ≫ rchar ,

thard ,2PL ∝ aνout . In the GW phase, thard ,GW ∝ a4.The normalization H in Eqn. 5 is defined such that 

τtot ≡

Z rISCO 

> ainit

da 

˙a (7) is constant for all binaries, where rISCO is the innermost stable circular orbit. The initial separation at which binaries are assumed to form, ainit , also has a single value for all binaries. The 2PL model therefore has five free parameters: νout , νin , rchar , ainit , & τtot .A drawback to this approach is that inspiral rate through the inner astrophysical and GW regimes is strongly constrained by binary evolution at large sep-arations, far outside the PTA regime. This is because 6 L. Blecha 

the overall normalization of the hardening rate, H, is set by parameters that predominantly affect early bi-nary inspiral. The total time τtot is dominated by the early stages of inspiral for the model parameter values favored in NG15Astro, and ainit and νout by definition concern only this early phase. By using such a model, in which the outer and inner evolution is intertwined via parameters such as τtot , the information provided by PTAs about the inner phase is diluted by the highly uncertain outer phase of SMBHB evolution. For the default value of νout = +2 .5 used in NG15Astro, the slowest SMBHB hardening rate often occurs at the largest separation. This exacerbates the problem, because when thard ,2PL (ainit ) ∼ τtot , there is often essentially one valid solution for H over all SMBHB masses and mass ratios. This suppresses varia-tion in hardening rates through the PTA regime, which is not ideal for performing parameter inference. This is-sue is even more important given that the PTA regime is precisely the realm least accessible to EM observations. To maximize the information gleaned from PTAs, we should parameterize SMBHB inspiral in a manner that isolates and optimizes sensitivity to the PTA frequency regime. We should also account for the fact that the hardening rate outside this frequency regime cannot be constrained directly with PTAs. In the next section, I present a model that satisfies these requirements. 2.3. “Inside-out” SMBHB hardening 

The orbital semi-major axis aGW at which a SMBHB transitions from astrophysically to GW-driven hard-ening can be defined as that at which the astro-physical hardening timescale equals the GW timescale 

thard ,GW (aGW ). Because of the steep scaling of 

thard ,GW ∝ a4, the total merger time and the GW energy emitted at each frequency are very sensitive to this pa-rameter. Binaries with very large aGW will stall, while those with very small aGW will contribute minimally to the GWB. As in NG15Astro, I focus only on circular binaries (such that g(e) = 1 in Equation 3). The exten-sibility of this model to include eccentric orbits is dis-cussed in Section 4.1. For reasonable parameter choices, 

aGW for M ∼ 10 9M⊙ BHs tends to lie near or within the the PTA band (see Figures 2-4). I propose that aGW should be considered a key free parameter to be constrained by PTA observations of the GWB. Beginning with this premise, I construct an “inside out” model for SMBHB hardening. Figure 2 il-lustrates the hardening model components, which are described in detail below. The model retains the ansatz of the 2PL model that the hardening rate follows a single power law in the “inner” astrophysically driven regime, with a power-law index νin .The inner hardening regime must be connected to the cosmological SMBHB formation rate at larger separa-tions. For the purposes of constraining SMBHB popu-lations with PTAs, the exact hardening rate needs to be modeled only out to the largest binary separations acces-sible to PTAs. Unlike the 2PL model, I do not explicitly model the ‘outer’ hardening rate but rather define τout 

as the time elapsed from binary formation ( a = ainit )until a = rchar . This formalism does not require ainit to be specified explicitly. A drawback is that τout cannot be directly constrained with EM observations of dual ac-tive galactic nuclei (AGN), but such constraints would at any rate rely on the uncertain active fraction of SMBH pairs. My model could be readily extended to include explicit binary evolution in the outer phase, but at the expense of adding more parameters. I assume that τout has a constant value for all bina-ries, though one could add dependence on mass, mass ratio, redshift, or environmental parameters. rchar is constrained to be larger than the orbital separation of binaries corresponding to the minimum GW frequency probed by PTA observations, such that ˙ a is explicitly modeled within the PTA band. This inside-out hardening model is specified by: ˙ain = ˙ aGW (aGW )

 aaGW 

1−νin 

, (8) ˙a (a < r char ) = ˙ ain + ˙ aGW (9) where ˙ aGW is given by Equation 3, and ˙ a(a > r char )is not modeled explicitly. The total inspiral time from binary formation to merger is 

τtot ≡ τout + τin+gw , (10) 

τin+gw ≡

Z rISCO 

> rchar

da 

˙a(a < r char ) , (11) such that a binary forming at a lookback time of tlook 

will reach rchar at the time tlook − τout .The simplest choice for the parameter aGW would be to assume a constant value for all binary masses and mass ratios. However, because gravitational length units scale linearly with mass (R g ≡ GM/c 2), one obtains very different results if aGW is set to a constant in phys-ical length units versus a constant in gravitational units. If aGW has constant value in physical units of pc for all binaries, then ˙ a(aGW ) ∝ M 3 and thard ,in (aGW ) ∝ M −3,such that both quantities vary by 24 orders of magnitude across the SMBH mass range of 10 4-10 12 M⊙ considered in this work. In other words, if this model represented reality, only the most massive SMBHBs could merge An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 7𝒓 𝐜𝐡𝐚𝐫 ,𝟗   

> 𝒇 𝐞𝐦 𝟏𝟎 𝟗 𝑴 ⊙
> =𝟏 /(𝟐𝟎𝐲𝐫 )

# 𝒂 𝐆𝐖 ,𝟗 

# 𝒓 𝐈𝐒𝐂𝐎 

outer astro regime  inner astro regime  GW regime     

> 𝑓 em 10 7𝑀 ⊙
> =1/(20 yr )
> 𝑓 em 10 11 𝑀 ⊙
> =1/(20 yr )

# 𝝉 𝐨𝐮𝐭 

𝒂 𝐆𝐖 = 𝒂 𝐆𝐖 ,𝟗 𝑴 𝟗  

> 𝜶 GW

(𝟒 𝜼 )𝜷 𝐆𝐖 

Figure 2. Schematic illustrat-ing key features of the inside-out SMBHB inspiral model. The hardening rate vs. separation is shown for the A0 model (de-fined below), for select masses and mass ratios. Binary separa-tion decreases from left to right (the direction of forward time). 

aGW ≡ aGW ,9 M αGW  

> 9

(4 η)βGW is the transition from the astro-physical to the GW regime (tri-angles). rchar (∝ M αchar  

> 9

when in R g units) is the boundary be-tween the inner and outer astro-physical regimes (circles); it is chosen to lie outside the PTA band. The outer regime is mod-eled via a timescale τout rather than an explicit form for ˙ a.

within tHub , because τin+gw < t Hub for low-mass BHs would imply unphysical (or even superluminal) harden-ing rates for massive SMBHs. Alternatively, if aGW has a constant value in gravita-tional units, then ˙ a(aGW ) ∝ M 0 and thard ,in ∝ M . This eliminates the problem of steep mass scaling, though it imposes the opposite (linear) scaling for the inspiral timescales (i.e., more massive binaries have longer inspi-ral timescales from a fixed rchar ). In light of these considerations, and in the absence of empirical constraints, I abandon the notion of a con-stant value of aGW for all SMBHBs (in either physical or gravitational units) and instead introduce new parame-ters for the scaling of aGW with M and η. I define aGW ,9

as a free parameter representing the binary separation at which hardening transitions to GW-dominated for an equal-mass, circular binary with M = 10 9M⊙ and then define aGW according to 

aGW = aGW ,9 M αGW  

> 9

(4 η)βGW (12) Here aGW and aGW ,9 are defined in gravitational units. In physical length units of cm this yields 

aGW[cm] = aGW ,9

 G 10 9M⊙

c2



M αGW +1 9 (4 η)βGW .

(13) Throughout this paper, aGW and aGW ,9 refer to quan-tities in gravitational units unless the explicit notation 

aGW[cm] or aGW ,9[cm] is used. Plugging this into Equa-tion 3 yields ˙ain (aGW ) = − 16 ( G 10 9M⊙)3

5 c5a3GW ,9

M −3αGW  

> 9

(4 η)1−3βGW .

(14) The hardening timescale at aGW is 

thard ,in (aGW ) = 5 c5a4GW ,9

16( G 10 9M⊙)3 M 4αGW +1 9 (4 η)4βGW −1.

(15) Thus, αGW = −1 yields no mass scaling of aGW[cm] 

but has cubic and inverse cubic mass scaling of the hard-ening rate and timescale, respectively, at aGW . αGW = 0 yields a constant inner hardening rate for all masses, a constant aGW (in units of R g), and linear mass scal-ing of the hardening timescale. While in principle αGW 

could take any value, steep mass scalings will strongly limit the range of SMBHB masses that can merge within 

tH, as well as the range of SMBHB masses for which 

| ˙a| < | ˙a|max (defined in Section 2.4). The mass scalings of aGW , ˙ a(aGW ), and thard ,in (aGW ) are all less than lin-ear for −1/3 < αGW < 0. Similarly, 0 < β GW < 1/2yields less-than-linear scaling of these quantities with η.I focus on two different cases here: 1. αGW = −1/4, βGW = +1 /4: this corresponds to an inner hardening timescale with no mass or mass ratio dependence, such that in R g units, aGW ∝

M −1/4η1/4. Both aGW[cm] and ˙ a(aGW ) then scale as ∝ M 3/4η1/4. With the choice νin = 0, the inner hardening timescale is also constant for all a. Irefer to this as the “ A0 ” model and treat it as the primary fiducial model in the subsequent analysis. 2. αGW = 0, βGW = 0: this yields a constant aGW for all masses and mass ratios, a constant ˙ a(aGW ), and an inner hardening timescale that scales linearly with M (and is independent of η). I refer to this (with νin = 0) as the “ B0 ” model. 8 L. Blecha 

Note that the 2PL hardening model has a similar scal-ing of aGW with M and η as the A0 model, because of its constant overall inspiral timescale. The scaling in that case does not exactly follow αGW = −1/4, βGW = +1 /4, because aGW has some dependence on the outer hard-ening phase, but it is close. I make one final addition to the inside-out hardening model: the separation rchar at which the inner harden-ing regime begins is also allowed to scale with M . This choice is partly pragmatic, because it increases the pa-rameter space of hardening models that are valid across a wide range of binary masses (see Section 2.4). I define 

rchar = rchar ,9 M αchar +1 9 , (16) where rchar and rchar ,9 are both defined here in physical 

rather than gravitational units, unlike aGW . rchar ,9 is the start of the inner hardening regime for an equal-mass, 10 9M⊙ binary, and αchar is defined such that 

αchar = −1 yields a constant rchar (in physical units) for all binary masses. If rchar is assumed to scale with the transition to the “hard” binary regime ( rchar ∝ rhard ), then rchar ∝ GM/σ 2 

> ∗

for stellar scattering models (G. D. Quinlan 1996). If a scaling M ∝ σ4 

> ∗

is also assumed, then 

rchar ∝ M +1 /2, corresponding to αchar = −1/2. One can also consider the separation at which (circu-lar) binaries reach a given GW frequency: a ∝ M +1 /3

(αchar = −2/3). Choosing αchar = −2/3 has the advan-tage that, as long as rchar ,9 is larger than the separation at which 10 9M⊙ binaries enter the PTA regime, binaries of all masses are guaranteed to start their evolution out-side the PTA regime. In practice, I find that αchar − 1/2and αchar = −2/3 yield very similar results, so I adopt 

αchar = −2/3 as the fiducial value for all models in this work. The fiducial value of rchar ,9 is chosen to be 1 pc, which is comfortably outside the low-frequency edge of the PTA band even for a hypothetical 100-yr data set. To summarize, the inputs for this SMBHB hardening model are aGW , νin , rchar , and τout . Three parameters specify aGW to control its scaling with mass and mass ratio ( aGW ,9, αGW , & βGW ), while two parameters spec-ify the mass scaling of rchar (rchar ,9 & αchar ). Table 1 gives parameter values for the fiducial models A0 and B0 ,along with the fiducial parameters for “stellar-like” and “gas-like” models discussed in Section 3.7, and variants of these fiducial models featuring systematic parameter sweeps (see Sections 3.1-3.6. In Appendix A, I outline an alternate version of this model in which ˙ a(rchar ) (for equal-mass, circular binaries) is assumed to be a con-stant input parameter, such that νin is instead derived from ˙ a(rchar ). I implement this inside-out hardening model in the SMBHB population synthesis code holodeck 2, which is used for analysis of cosmological SMBHB populations and GWB spectra throughout this work. 2.4. Constraints on physical regions of parameter space 

A disadvantage of analytic power-law models for SMBHB hardening is that no limits are naturally im-posed on the maximum rate of hardening, possibly lead-ing to unphysical results. (Notably, the same short-coming affects models that ignore astrophysical SMBHB hardening entirely and assume that all binaries effi-ciently reach the GW regime.) Indeed, the hardening rate can in some portions of parameter space exceed the speed of light. To avoid unphysical hardening rates, I modify the above models by imposing a “speed limit” on the hard-ening rate, | ˙a|max . Here I simply take | ˙a|max = c. While hardening rates near this limit are unrealistic at separa-tions much larger than rISCO , choosing this value pro-vides a firm upper limit for exploring the allowed param-eter space. Within the observable PTA band, a more realistic limit for | ˙a| would be the binary orbital speed, 

| ˙a|max = vorb , calculated at each binary separation or at rISCO . I verify that the models presented here have 

| ˙a| < v orb for all binaries contributing non-negligibly to the GWB. In practice, SMBHBs that spend much time at relativistic hardening rates will not contribute to an observable GWB anyway, because they will have very little time to emit GWs before merging. Setting ( ainit − rchar )/τ out < c for the outer astrophys-ical inspiral phase again provides a firm but unrealistic upper limit. For the initial separation of ainit = 10 kpc used in NG15Astro, this yields τout ≳ 30 kyr. A more realistic estimate of the minimum τout would be the dy-namical time of the host galaxy at ainit , or one that yields ⟨| ˙aout |⟩ ∼ σ∗. I show in Section 3.6 that the shape and amplitude of the GWB is not very sensitive to the choice of τout when it is less than a Gyr. Although no maximum | ˙a| was imposed on the 2PL hardening model used in NG15Astro, the hardening rates are well below c for the favored model parameters. For their fiducial choice of νout = +2 .5, rchar = 100 pc, and ainit = 10 kpc, only models with νin ≳ +1 .25, 

νin ≲ −1, and/or τtot < 0.01 Gyr have peak harden-ing rates | ˙a| > c . Only values of −1.5 < ν in < 0.5and τtot > 0.1 Gyr were considered in NG15Astro, and models with νin < −1 lie in the tail of the posterior distribution. Moreover, in all NG15Astro models with 

νin < 1, the peak hardening rates occur at rchar = 100  

> 2https://github.com/nanograv/holodeck

An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 9

Table 1. The table gives the model names and fiducial parameter values for the hardening models discussed in this work. All models shown assume αchar = −2/3. The “Fiducial Models” indicate the primary 6 sets of model parameters used in this work. The “Model Variants” are used to systematically vary a single parameter across the range of values shown while keeping all other parameters fixed at the fiducial values for a given fiducial model. For example, the A0-agw9var parameter sweep varies aGW ,9

from 10 1.5-10 3.75 Rg while keeping all other parameters fixed at the fiducial A0 values. The last column notes the section(s) of the paper where each model or model variant is primarily discussed. Name log 10 

 aGW ,9

> Rg



αGW βGW νin log 10 

 τout 

> Gyr



log 10 

 rchar ,9

> pc



Section(s) Fiducial Models 

A0 2.5 − 14 + 14 0 0.0 0.0 § 3.1 

B0 2.5 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 § 3.2 

Astar 3.5 − 14 + 14 −1 0.0 0.0 § 3.7.1, 3.5 

Bstar 3.5 0 0 −1 0.0 0.0 § 3.7.1, 3.5 

Agas 2.0 − 14 + 14 +2 0.0 0.0 § 3.7.2, 3.5 

Bgas 2.0 0 0 +2 0.0 0.0 § 3.7.2, 3.5 Model Variants 

*-agw9var [1 .5, 3.75] § 3.3 

*-αvar [− 12 , 0] § 3.4 

*-βvar [− 12 , + 12 ] § 3.4 

*-nuvar [−1, +2] § 3.5 

*-toutvar [−1.0, 1.0] § 3.6 

*-rch9var [−1.0, 2.0] § 3.6 

pc, which is well outside the PTA regime. Unrealis-tic hardening rates at rchar are equivalent to underesti-mating the “outer” inspiral time ( τout ). Superluminal hardening rates are achieved only for M ≲ 10 4M⊙ (for 

νin ≲ −1) and M ≲ 10 6M⊙ (for νin ≲ −1.5)—a mass regime that contributes negligibly to the PTA signal. Thus, the NG15Astro results were unaffected by the lack of a maximum allowed | ˙a| in the 2PL hardening model. I do not require that rISCO < a GW < r char for all bi-naries. Binaries with aGW ≳ rchar will have no inner hardening regime (i.e., GW-only inspiral for a < r char ). Binaries with aGW ≲ rISCO would have essentially no GW regime—in other words, astrophysics would domi-nate all the way to merger in these cases. Such binaries will produce very little GW emission during inspiral. These edge cases motivate an additional constraint on the hardening model parameter space: |νin | should be capped at a maximum value |νin |max to prevent un-realistic “jumps” in the hardening rate. This is most important for the alternate parameterization described in Appendix A, where νin is derived from ˙ a(rchar ) and could cause numerical instabilities if it approaches in-finity. However, νin > +4 is problematic for a differ-ent reason: because thard ,GW ∝ a4, νin > +4 corre-sponds to an inconsistent scenario in which GWs domi-nate at a > a GW and the inner power-law dominates at 

a < a GW —the opposite of how these phases are defined. In practice, most binaries will have τin+gw > t Hub for 

νin > +4, and some will have | ˙a| > c for νin < −4. Itherefore choose |νin |max = 4. When this hardening model is used for GW calcula-tions, rchar should be larger than the binary separations corresponding to the lowest relevant GW frequencies. In other words, because ˙ a is not explicitly modeled in the outer hardening phase, the inner phase must begin before binaries enter the PTA band, or the resulting GWB will be missing GW strain from the early stages of inspiral. A circular 10 9M⊙ binary at z = 0 reaches 

fobs = (100 yr) −1 at a = 0 .2 pc and fobs = (20 yr) −1

at a = 0 .06 pc. If αchar = −2/3, choosing rchar ,9 >a(fem = fobs ,min ) ensures that rchar > a (fobs ,min ) for all binary masses and redshifts. Thus, the criteria that define physically reasonable portions of the hardening model parameter space are: 1. | ˙a| < | ˙a|max 

2. |νin | < |νin |max 

3. rchar > a (fobs ,min )where the last criterion strictly applies only when used for GW calculations. Criterion (1) can be written in terms of input parame-ters as follows. First, note that this criterion is satisfied at all binary separations if it is satisfied at rchar . The 10 L. Blecha 

Figure 3. Left panel: Shaded regions denote the allowed parameter space ( νin , a GW ,9) for select SMBHB inspiral models. Purple curves denote the minimum νin for a given aGW ,9 for the A0 model with rchar ,9 = 0.1pc (dashed), 1 pc (solid; fiducial value), & 10 pc (dot-dashed). These rchar ,9 values are also marked by vertical black lines. The green solid curve shows the minimum νin for the B0 model with rchar ,9 = 1 .0pc. Lower νin would produce | ˙a| > | ˙amax | for at least some binary masses in the range M = [10 4, 10 12 ]M ⊙. The absolute minimum is −| νin |max = −4. Larger positive νin values are allowed (up to |νin |max = 4) but will yield increasingly long inspiral timescales. Binaries with aGW ,9 > r char do not have an “inner” hardening phase prior to entering the GW regime. The black dotted line denotes the lower bound of aGW ,9 = rISCO . The yellow-green dotted line denotes the separation at which M = 10 9M⊙ circular binaries emit GWs at fobs ,min = 9 .0 × 10 −10 Hz. A consistent GWB calculation requires rchar > a (fobs ,min ). The black circle denotes the fiducial models ( νin = 0 , a GW ,9 = 10 2.5), the black triangle denotes the “gas-like” models ( νin = 2 , a GW ,9 = 10 2), and the black star denotes the “star-like” models ( νin = −1, a GW ,9 = 10 3.5). 

Right panel: The minimum νin versus aGW is shown for three different binary masses, for the same models as in the left panel. 

q = 1 binaries are shown in bold curves, and q = 0 .001 binaries are shown in light-shaded curves. rISCO , rchar , & aobs (fobs ,min )are also shown for each mass. Note that the x-axis in the right panels is aGW , not aGW ,9; the “bumps” in the A0 curves in the left panel arise where aGW falls below rISCO . Overall, a relatively narrow range of the model parameter space produces binary populations that do not exceed | ˙a|max while still merging most systems by z = 0. 

hardening rate at rchar is ˙a (rchar ) = ˙ aGW (rchar ) + ˙ ain (rchar )= − 64 G3

5c5

ηM 3

r3char 

"

1 + 

 rchar 

aGW 

4−νin 

#

. (17) For set values of aGW and rchar , the criterion | ˙a(rchar )| <

| ˙a|max , combined with criterion (2), sets a minimum al-lowed value of νin :

νin > max 



− | νin |max ,

4 − log 10 

  da dt max 

 − log 10 

  da dt GW (aGW )

log 10 (rchar ) − log 10 (aGW )

!

. (18) Note that νin has no maximum value except that im-posed by criterion (2). If we want to instead fix νin 

(and aGW ) and find the permitted range of rchar , cri-terion (1) does not yield a general analytic solution for the maximum rchar in terms of νin . However, a conser-vative upper limit on rchar can be set by noting that 

| ˙aGW (rchar ) | < | ˙ain (rchar ) |, often by many orders of magnitude, such that 64 G3

5c5

ηM 3

a3GW 

"

1 −

 rchar 

aGW 

1−νin 

#

< | ˙a|max (19) 

rchar 

aGW 

<

 5c5 | ˙a|max a3GW 

64 G3ηM 3 + 1 

1/(1 −νin )

, (νin < 1) (20) is a useful limit on rchar when an analytic expression is desired. (The | ˙a|max criterion does not impose any limits on rchar if νin ≥ 1.) The second criterion |νin | < |νin |max is already ex-pressed in terms of input parameters for this model, and it is almost always a less stringent constraint on νin than Equation 18 (see Figure 3). Appendix A outlines these criteria for the alternate model parameterization using ˙a(rchar ) as an input parameter instead of νin .Because aGW and rchar depend on mass, the valid val-ues of rchar ,9 and νin also vary with mass. rchar ,9 and An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 11 

νin must be valid across the entire range of masses and mass ratios considered in order to use these models for SMBHB parameter inference. Figure 3 visualizes the model parameter space allowed by these physical constraints. Because | ˙a| increases sharply as the GW-dominated inspiral proceeds, smaller values of aGW ,9 lead to stricter limits on νin . Larger val-ues of rchar also restrict νin , because | ˙ain | is maximum at rchar for all νin < 1. νin can be arbitrarily large (up to |νin |max = 4), though this will yield very long inspiral timescales. The fiducial A0 model (purple solid line) requires 

νin ≳ 0.5 when aGW ,9 = rISCO , a limit that expands to νin ≳ −5.5 at rchar ,9 = 1pc. In the B0 model (green solid line), νin is more constrained than in the A0 model. Variations in rchar ,9 do not alter the minimum νin very much when aGW ,9 is small, but these curves diverge as 

aGW ,9 increases. For aGW ,9[cm] ≥ rchar ,9, there is no inner hardening phase—the binary transitions directly from the outer phase to the GW phase. However, since 

aGW ,9[cm] and rchar ,9 have different mass scaling unless 

αGW = αchar , some binary masses may be in this GW-only regime even if aGW ,9[cm] < r char ,9. For the fidu-cial A0 model, all binaries masses and mass ratios con-sidered ( M = 10 4 − 10 12 M⊙ and q = 10 −3 − 1) have 

aGW[cm] < r char and thus have an inner hardening phase. In contrast, the most massive SMBHBs in the fiducial 

B0 model are already in the GW regime at rchar .The right-hand panels of Figure 3 show how the al-lowed parameter space varies with binary mass and mass ratio. The minimum νin values vary little over three or-ders of magnitude in mass ratio (dark vs light lines) but varies strongly with binary mass. In both the A0 and the B0 models, the lowest-M , lowest-q binaries place the strongest constraints on νin for most values of aGW .In all panels of Figure 3, the yellow-green dotted line denotes the orbital separation at which circular bina-ries of a given mass enter the PTA regime (defined here as fobs ,min = 9 .0 × 10 −10 Hz). rchar > a orb (fobs ,min )is required to ensure that all GW emission at relevant frequencies is included. For the fiducial value αchar =

−2/3, rchar and a(fobs ,min ) have the same mass scal-ing, and all three plotted values of rchar ,9 = 0 .1, 1, 10pc satisfy this criterion. The fiducial value rchar ,9 = 1pc corresponds to 10 4.3Rg for M = 10 9M⊙, such that 

rchar ranges from 0 .02pc = 10 7.7Rg at M = 10 4M⊙ to 

rchar = 10pc = 10 2.3Rg at M = 10 12 M⊙.2.5. Semi-analytic SMBHB population models 

I use the semi-analytic / semi-empirical SMBHB pop-ulation synthesis code holodeck to create cosmological populations of SMBHBs, apply analytic hardening mod-els, and calculate the resulting GWB spectra. A detailed description of the procedure and the elements of the SMBHB population models can be found in NG15Astro, with some recent updates as outlined in L. Z. Kelley et al. (2024) and C. Matt et al. (2026a). I briefly review the most salient points here. The desired input for GWB calculations is the number density of SMBHBs as a function of M , q, z, and a.This depends on the number density of galaxies (i.e., the GSMF), the relation between SMBH and galaxy masses, and the galaxy merger rate. Combining these elements yields a number density of binaries forming (at a given 

M , q, & z). The SMBHB hardening models then specify the orbital evolution of a from formation to merger. I use the z = 0 MBH − Mbulge relation of J. Kormendy & L. C. Ho (2013) as in NG15Astro. Following C. Matt et al. (2026a), I use the double-Schechter GSMF of J. Leja et al. (2020) and the V. Rodriguez-Gomez et al. (2015) galaxy merger rates derived from the Illustris cosmological simulation (e.g., D. Nelson et al. 2015). I do not consider redshift evolution of the GSMF or 

MBH − Mbulge relation in this work. The rest of this paper focuses on the impact of SMBHB hardening pa-rameters on GWB spectra, rather than the impact of these galactic-scale parameter choices.  

> 3.

RESULTS Figure 4 shows thard , ˙ a, & τin+gw versus separation for the fiducial A0 and B0 model parameters, for a range of binary masses and mass ratios, and Figure 5 shows the corresponding GWB spectra. I discuss the A0 model in Section 3.1 and the B0 model in Section 3.2. 3.1. The constant-timescale A0 model 

The binary hardening timescales and rates for the 

A0 model are shown via the blue curves in Figure 4. The middle panels show the hardening rate | ˙a| versus separation, illustrating two key features of this hard-ening model: the transition radius aGW between the inner and GW-dominated hardening, and the constant power-law index νin for inner astrophysical hardening at 

rchar > a > a GW . The vertical solid lines in Figure 4 show the binary separation at which an equal-mass, cir-cular BH binary of mass M at z ∼ 0 would enter the low-frequency edge of the PTA regime, defined here as 

fobs = (20 yr) −1 = 1 .6 × 10 9 Hz. 10 9M⊙ binaries evolve from rchar = 1 pc to a = 0 .057 pc before reaching this frequency and then shrink by another factor of 3.8 be-fore transitioning to the GW regime at aGW ,9 = 10 2.5Rg

(aGW ,9[cm] = 0 .015 pc). Because thard ,in is constant in the A0 model, the cumulative inspiral time τin+gw 

(lower panels) varies by less than a factor of 8, from 12 L. Blecha 

Figure 4. SMBHB hardening timescales and rates versus separation are shown for the fiducial hardening models A0 (blue solid curves) and B0 (orange dashed curves). The x-axis in the left panels is the binary separation a in units of R g (which scales linearly with M ), while the right panels use units of pc. Note that a decreases from left to right on the plot, in the direction of forward time. All curves start at rchar and stop at rISCO ; the values of both quantities vary with M . In all panels, line color scales with M and line thickness scales with q, as indicated in the legends. The top panels show the binary hardening timescale t = a/ (− ˙a), the middle panels show the hardening rate | ˙a|, and the bottom panels show the cumulative inspiral time from rchar to rISCO ), τin+gw . Curves are shown for four values of mass M and mass ratio q spanning the range used in the GWB calculations. Note that in the B0 model, ˙ a versus a[R g] has no mass dependence, such that the orange dashed lines for different masses overlap in the middle left panel. The vertical solid lines mark the low-frequency edge of the PTA regime, defined here as the orbital separation at which a circular binary of mass M has a GW frequency of (20 yr) −1. The horizontal dashed black line in the top and bottom panels marks tHub , and the gray hatched region in the middle panels denotes hardening rates that are disallowed by the | ˙a|max criterion. PTA measurements of the GWB are sensitive to the transition of SMBHBs from the astrophysical to the GW regime. 

τin+gw = 0 .64-5 .1 Myr, across the masses and mass ra-tios considered. For all binaries, rchar is ∼ 18 × larger than the sep-aration at which z ∼ 0 sources enter the PTA regime, and it is a factor of ∼ 6 larger than the correspond-ing separation for fem = (100 yr) −1. rchar > aGW 

for most binaries, but M > 2.4 × 10 10 M⊙ binaries are already GW-dominated when they enter the PTA band. Within the inner astrophysical hardening phase, 

thard ,in = 4 .9 × 10 5 yr for all binaries. aGW ranges from 10 3.75 Rg = 2 .7 × 10 −6pc for equal-mass M = 10 4M⊙

binaries to 10R g = 0.48 pc for binaries with M =10 12 M⊙, q = 10 −3.The middle-left panel of Figure 4 illustrates that ˙ aGW 

is exactly the same for all binaries of a given mass ratio. In other words, the GW-driven hardening rate (∝ M 3/a 3) is independent of binary mass when a is ex-pressed in R g units. The parameter aGW simply speci-fies where binaries begin to follow this GW-driven curve. For the B0 model, this transition has no M or q depen-dence at all (i.e., all the orange curves in the middle-left panel exactly overlap). This further motivates the inside-out hardening model: modeling PTA-observable GWs from SMBHBs requires only specifying the point at which binaries transition to the GW regime and the (often small) portion of astrophysical evolution that falls within the PTA frequency range. An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 13 

Figure 5. GWB spectra are shown for the same fiducial hardening models as in Figure 4: A0 (blue solid curves) and 

B0 (orange dashed curves). For comparison, the black dotted line shows a GW-only hardening model as described in Sec-tion 2.1. The GWB for GW-only hardening deviates slightly from a pure power-law owing to discrete source effects at high frequencies. Shaded regions denote the 50% interval over 100 realizations of the GWB for each model. Both the 

A0 and the B0 models have low-frequency attenuation due to astrophysical hardening, though only the A0 model has an actual low-frequency turnover. 

The blue solid curve in Figure 5 shows the GWB spec-trum for the A0 model. It is significantly attenuated rela-tive to a pure power-law, with a low-frequency turnover. The median characteristic strain amplitude is 10 −14 .5 at (10 yr) −1 and 10 −14 .9 at yr −1. Note that because these SMBHB populations are not fit to GW data, the abso-lute GWB amplitudes are less important than the rela-tive differences between hardening models, which I focus on in the remainder of this paper. 3.2. The constant-aGW B0 model 

The orange curves in Figure 4 show the binary hard-ening rates and timescales for the B0 model. All binaries follow the same | ˙a| versus a curve when a is plotted in Rg units, modulo the scaling with mass ratio. thard and 

τin+gw both scale linearly with M , such that massive, low-mass-ratio binaries take longer to merge. Because 

aGW = 10 2.5Rg is independent of M , aGW[cm] varies lin-early with M . As in the A0 model, the most massive binaries are already in the GW phase at rchar ; in the B0 

model this occurs for M > 10 10 M⊙. q = 1 , M = 10 9M⊙

binaries in the B0 model have a total inspiral time from 1pc of ∼ 10 6.5 yr, which is very similar to the A0 model. Unlike the A0 model, though, τin+gw varies by about eight orders of magnitude across the masses and mass ratios considered, from < 100 yr to almost 10 10 yr. The GWB spectrum above fobs ∼ 6 nHz is largely identical for the A0 and B0 models (Figure 5). At lower frequencies, the B0 GWB is shallower than a pure power-law, but it has less attenuation than the A0 GWB. Its amplitude at 2 nHz is ∼ 30% higher, and its spectrum does not actually “turn over.” 3.3. Dependence on aGW ,9

Figures 6a & Figure 6b show binary inspiral for 

A0-agw9var model variants with aGW ,9 ranging from 10 1.5-10 3.75 Rg. Massive binaries with small aGW ap-proach relativistic | ˙a| at rchar , and smaller values of 

aGW ,9 for which | ˙a(rchar )| > c are not shown. τin+gw 

increases sharply from a few hundred yr for aGW ,9 =10 1.5Rg to a few ×10 10 yr for aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg.The resulting GWB spectra are shown in Figure 6c, and Figure 6d shows the GWB amplitude ratios 

A3yr /A 10yr and A1yr /A 10yr , with a dashed line mark-ing ratios for an A ∝ f −2/3 power law. Both the GWB amplitude and spectral shape vary dramatically across the aGW ,9 values considered. For aGW ,9 ≲ 100R g, the GWB spectrum is essentially flat with very low ampli-tudes, due to strong astrophysical hardening. As aGW ,9

increases, so does the GWB amplitude, until it reaches a peak at aGW ,9 ∼ 1000 − 2000R g. At this peak there is little to no low-frequency attenuation, and the spectra closely resemble an f −2/3 power-law model for idealized GW-only inspiral. These cases represent a near-perfect balance in which massive binaries are efficiently brought to the edge of the PTA regime by astrophysics and then driven through it predominantly by GWs. At larger values of aGW ,9, most binaries are unable to reach the PTA band within tHub , and the GWB amplitude drops precipitously from near maximal at 

aGW ,9 = 10 3.25 Rg, to zero above f = 0.4 yr −1 at 

aGW ,9 = 10 3.5Rg (where low-mass binaries stall), to zero overall at aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg (where virtually all bina-ries stall). The amplitude ratios in Figure 6d show a clear trend from very flat spectral shapes (and low am-plitudes) at small aGW ,9, to a nearly power-law shape at aGW ,9 = 1000R g, to a steep spectrum at the largest 

aGW ,9, before the GWB disappears entirely. We see that only aGW ,9 in the range 10 1.5-10 3.5Rg are consistent with an observable GWB in this model, and the extremes of this range are only marginally observ-able. (The low-frequency amplitude is suppressed by a factor of ∼ 1000 at aGW ,9 = 10 1.5Rg relative to the max-imum at ∼ 10 3Rg.) In other words, simply by requiring that binary evolution obeys | ˙a|max < c and produces a detectable GWB, aGW ,9 is constrained to within a factor 14 L. Blecha 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 6. Key results for the A0-agw9var model that varies aGW ,9 with other parameters at fiducial A0 values. The color scale indicates the value of aGW ,9. (a) Top panel: binary hardening rate versus separation (in R g units) for select masses, mass ratios, and aGW ,9 values, in a similar manner as the middle panels of Figure 4. Here, thicker curves denote more massive binaries, solid curves denote q = 1, and dotted curves denote q = 10 −3. Bottom panel: τin+gw versus separation. (b) Top panel: τin+gw versus 

aGW ,9 for equal-mass binaries with M = 10 7, 10 9, &10 11 , as indicated in the legend. Filled+open circles denote the fiducial model. Bottom panel: τin+gw versus M for the same three aGW ,9 values as in (a). Solid (dotted) lines denote q = 1 ( q = 10 −3). In both panels, the black dashed line indicates tHub . (c) GWB spectra for aGW ,9 varied between 10 1.5Rg and 10 3.75 Rg. (Note that aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg does not produce an observable GWB and does not appear on the plot.) The thick solid line denotes the fiducial model. Shaded regions denote the 50% range over 100 GWB realizations. (d) Top panel: The GWB characteristic strain amplitude at three frequencies versus aGW ,9. Middle panel: Ratio of GWB amplitude at fobs = (3 yr) −1 & (10 yr) −1,versus aGW ,9. Bottom panel: GWB amplitude ratio at fobs = yr −1 & (10 yr) −1, versus aGW ,9. The dashed lines indicate the ratios for A ∝ f −2/3. In all panels, shaded regions denote the 50% range over 100 realizations. Peak GWB amplitudes occur for aGW ,9 = 1000 − 2000R g, with no observable GWB for aGW ,9 < 10 1.5Rg or > 10 3.5Rg. Between these limits, the GWB is quite sensitive to aGW ,9, with large variations in spectral shape, and amplitudes varying by factors of up to ∼ 10 3.An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 15 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 7. Key results for the B0-agw9var model that varies aGW ,9 with other parameters at fiducial B0 , in the same manner as in Figure 6a-6d. The upper panel of Figure 7b includes small aGW ,9 values that do not satisfy ˙ a < | ˙a|max (gray × symbols). As in the A0-agw9var models, the GWB amplitudes peak at aGW ,9 = 1000 − 2000R g, but the high-frequency amplitudes do not drop as sharply for larger aGW ,9. Small aGW ,9 (≤ 100R g) are disallowed by the | ˙a|max criterion. 16 L. Blecha 

of ∼ 30 −100. And within that range, the low-frequency amplitude varies by an even larger factor, with huge variation in spectral shapes. Similar results are found for the other models in Table 1, discussed in more detail below. The range of allowed aGW ,9 values that produce an observable GWB varies between the models but in all cases span ≲ two orders of magnitude and have sig-nificant spectral variation within this range. The GWB is therefore quite sensitive to aGW ,9, motivating its use as a free parameter to be constrained by PTAs. The default GSMF, galaxy merger rate, and MBH −

Mbulge parameters used in this work produce GWB am-plitudes slightly below the published value of 2 .4×10 −15 

at f = yr −1 from (G. Agazie et al. 2023a), even for the hardening models that maximize GW emission in the PTA band. The tension between the observed GWB and that produced by SMBHB population models that match EM constraints has been discussed extensively in recent literature (e.g., G. Agazie et al. 2023b; G. Sato-Polito et al. 2023; E. R. Liepold & C.-P. Ma 2024; G. Sato-Polito et al. 2025; G. Sato-Polito & M. Zal-darriaga 2025; C. Matt et al. 2026a,b; C. J. Harris et al. 2026). Because the SMBHB models in this work are not fit to PTA data, the relative GWB amplitudes and shapes are more informative than their exact val-ues. Clearly, however, SMBHB hardening models with 

aGW ,9 ≲ 100R g will be inconsistent with observed GWB spectra that do not feature a very strong low-frequency turnover. Matching such a strongly attenuated GWB would require SMBHB masses and/or number densities well above those inferred from the z ∼ 0 EM constraints. Figure 7 explores variation of aGW ,9 in the 

B0-agw9var models. In Figure 7b, models with aGW <

10 2.25 Rg exceed | ˙a|max = c and are indicated with gray “×’s.” τin+gw increases with aGW ,9 (corresponding to more astrophysical stalling), but unlike the A0-agw9var 

models, here τin+gw also increases with M and q, up to the highest masses where strong GW emission short-ens the merger time. The τin+gw versus M curves thus have a peak at M ∼ 10 9 − 10 11 M⊙. This effect is most dramatic for the largest value of aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg,for which equal-mass binaries in the mass range ∼

10 8 − 10 10 M⊙ have τin+gw > t Hub and therefore do not contribute to the GWB. (For comparison, no binaries above ∼ 10 10 M⊙ merge within tHub for the A0-agw9var 

model with aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg.) Figures 7c & 7d show the corresponding GWB am-plitudes and amplitude ratios. As in the A0-agw9var 

models, the amplitudes peak at aGW ,9 ∼ 10 3 − 10 3.25 Rg

with a nearly f −2/3 spectrum. However, the spectral shape varies less with aGW ,9 than in the A0-agw9var 

models, and the trend in amplitude ratios is not mono-tonic. Rather than dramatically steepening for aGW ≥

10 3.25 Rg, the spectrum again becomes shallower than a power-law, and the amplitudes for aGW ,9 = 10 3.75 Rg

are only ∼ 8× lower than the fiducial model (rather than disappearing entirely). This difference between the A0-agw9var and B0-agw9var models arises from their different trends in τin+gw with mass. The inspi-ral timescales in the B0-agw9var model vary strongly and non-monotonically with M , such that highest- and lowest-M SMBHBs merge efficiently while M ∼ 10 8 −

10 10 M⊙ SMBHBs stall for large aGW ,9. GWB ampli-tudes are suppressed for large aGW ,9 in the B0-agw9var 

models, but less severely, and with little change in the GWB spectral shape. The effects of varying aGW ,9 can be summarized as follows. Minimum aGW ,9 values are firmly lim-ited by | ˙a|max < c (aGW ,9 ≳ 10 1.5Rg and ≳ 10 2Rg

for A0-agw9var and B0-agw9var , respectively). Max-imum aGW ,9 values are firmly limited by the fact that only binaries with τtot < t Hub (aGW ,9 ≲ 10 3.75 Rg for 

A0-agw9var and B0-agw9var ) can produce an observ-able GWB. aGW ,9 is therefore constrained to an allowed range of ≲ two orders of magnitude, and the GWB shape and amplitude vary widely within that range. For small aGW ,9 values, astrophysical hardening causes strong GWB attenuation. Intermediate values of 

aGW ,9 (∼ 1000 − 2000R g for these models) optimize the balance between efficient astrophysical hardening that brings binaries to the PTA regime but allows GWs to dominate thereafter, yielding a maximal GWB ampli-tude with little low-frequency attenuation. For large 

aGW ,9, binary hardening begins to stall. The GWB shape and amplitude depend very sensitively on which 

binaries stall outside the PTA regime versus those that have τin+gw ≲ tHub and spend maximal time in the PTA band. The variation in τin+gw with M dominates these effects in the A0-agw9var and B0-agw9var models. I ex-plore these mass trends further in the next subsection. 3.4. The mass and mass-ratio scaling of aGW 

The above comparison between the A0 model with 

αGW = −1/4, β GW = +1 /4 and the B0 model with 

αGW = βGW = 0 provides insight into how SMBHB evolution depends on the mass and mass-ratio scaling of 

aGW . Here I systematically vary αGW & βGW to better understand these trends. Figure 8 shows A0-αvar model variants. At SMBHB masses ≪ or ≫ 10 9M⊙, the inspiral time varies by many orders of magnitude between αGW = −1/2 and αGW =0. For αGW = −1/2, 10 4M⊙ binaries have τin+gw > 10 11 

yr while 10 12 M⊙ binaries have τin+gw ≲ 10 3 yr. For 

αGW = 0, the trend is reversed: 10 4M⊙ binaries have An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 17 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 8. Key results are shown for the A0-agw9var model with varying αGW (which controls the mass scaling of aGW ,9), and with fiducial values of all other parameters, in the same manner as in Figure 6a-6d. Filled+open circles in (b) & (d), and the thick solid line in (c), denote the fiducial value αGW = −1/4. Despite large differences in τin+gw for αGW = −0.5 - 0, GWB amplitudes vary by less than a factor of 2, with negligible difference at fobs ≳ 6 nHz. 18 L. Blecha 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 9. Key results are shown for the A0-nuvar models with varying νin (which controls the power-law index of thard in the inner astrophysical regime) and fiducial A0 values of all other parameters, in the same manner as in Figure 6a-6d. Filled+open circles in (b) & (d), and the thick solid line in (c), denote the fiducial value νin = 0. Despite large differences in τin+gw for 

νin = −1-2, GWB amplitudes are nearly identical at fobs ∼ (10 yr) −1, with only slight spectral steepening for larger νin .An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 19 

τin+gw < 100 yr and approach relativistic ˙a at rchar ,while 10 12 M⊙ binaries have τin+gw ∼ 10 7 − 10 8 yr. 

A0-αvar model variants with αGW > 0 exceed | ˙a|max .Note that the curves cross slightly above αGW = −1/4because GW emission contributes to the inspiral rate. Despite the wide range in τin+gw , the GWB spec-tra are remarkably consistent from αGW = −1/2 to 0. Lower αGW yields slightly more low-frequency turnover (below fobs ∼ 6 nHz), because these models drive mas-sive SMBHBs together very quickly. The GWB fre-quency at 2 nHz decreases by a factor of ∼ 2 from 

αGW = 0 to −1/2. The B0-αvar models have simi-larly weak dependence on αGW , as do the gas-like and stellar-like model variants discussed in Section 3.7. Values of αGW outside the range [ −1/2, 0] could also be considered if they satisfy the | ˙a|max criterion, but this tends to create a situation in which SMBHBs at one end of the mass spectrum cannot merge within tHub , while those at the other end approach relativistic speeds. As a result, the GWB is entirely comprised of SMBHBs in a fairly narrow mass range—a finely tuned scenario that seems unlikely to arise in nature. As a cautionary note, any GWB calculation that creates realizations of SMBHB populations from a discrete grid of mass bins (such as the semi-empirical framework in holodeck ) is susceptible to artifacts if the relevant mass range is coarsely sampled. When the mass range producing the GWB is narrow, a more finely spaced mass grid is re-quired to produce well-converged GWB predictions. I find that varying βGW , which controls the mass-ratio dependence of aGW , has essentially no effect on the GWB spectral shape or amplitude. In the A0-βvar 

models, the GWB amplitudes vary by < 1% as βGW 

is varied from −1/2 to +1 /2. This is also true in the 

B0-βvar model, as well as the stellar-like and gas-like model variants discussed in Section 3.7. The insensitiv-ity of the GWB to βGW reflects the fact that SMBHBs with high mass ratios (near q = 1) dominate the GWB. However, the total inspiral timescales for low-mass-ratio binaries do vary significantly with βGW . For 

q ∼ 0.01, τin+gw varies from ≲ 10 5 yr for βGW = +1 /2to ≳ 10 11 yr for βGW = −1/2 in the A0-βvar model. 

τin+gw for q ∼ 0.1 varies by about two orders of mag-nitude over the same range in βGW . Likewise, τin+gw 

varies strongly with αGW for low-mass and ultramassive SMBHBs. This has the important consequence that, even though the GWB is not sensitive to αGW and βGW ,SMBHB merger rates (and LISA event rates) are sensi-tive to these scalings. Similarly, the detection likelihood of individual continuous-wave (CW) sources above the background is sensitive to the mass distribution of SMB-HBs (E. C. Gardiner et al. 2024, 2025; E. C. Gardiner 2026). CW occurrence therefore may be more sensitive to αGW and βGW than the GWB itself. 3.5. Dependence on inner power-law index νin 

In addition to aGW , νin is the other key hardening parameter in the inner astrophysical regime. Figure 9 shows A0-nuvar model variants with νin = [ −1, +2]. For νin < 1, the hardening rate decreases from rchar to 

aGW before increasing sharply in the GW regime. The GWB spectra are very similar for νin = −1 to +1 .5, with slight low-frequency attenuation for lower νin 

due to faster astrophysical hardening. For νin = +2, the GWB spectrum is also slightly steeper across the rele-vant frequency range, because binaries ≲ 10 8M⊙ cannot merge within tHub . Notably, this is the opposite trend seen with νin in the 2PL hardening model (Section 2.2). In NG15Astro, νin is the only parameter varied that di-rectly controls hardening through the PTA band. The large GWB variation with aGW ,9 shown here is thus en-tirely folded into νin and other hardening parameters in the 2PL model. In my approach, these effects can be disentangled. Larger νin means more time spent emit-ting GWs in the PTA band, but only if the SMBHBs can reach the PTA regime before z = 0. Results for the B0-nuvar models are similar to the 

A0-nuvar models, except that νin < 0 is disallowed by 

| ˙a|max . Thus, in both of these models with aGW ,9 fixed at 10 2.5Rg, the GWB varies little with νin , much less than for variations in aGW ,9 with fixed νin = 0. How-ever, if aGW ,9 is either larger or smaller than the fiducial value of 10 2.5Rg, the GWB does vary significantly with 

νin . Figures 10a & b show GWB spectra for varying νin 

in the Agas-nuvar and Astar-nuvar models. In the for-mer, with aGW ,9 = 10 2Rg, the GWB spectra are atten-uated at all frequencies relative to Figure 9c. νin < −0.5is disallowed by the | ˙a|max criterion. All νin values yield similar GWB amplitudes at fobs > yr −1, but faster astrophysical hardening (lower νin ) yields increasingly strong low-frequency turnovers. At fobs > ( 10yr) −1,the amplitude for νin = −0.5 is 3.8 times lower than for 

νin = +2. This is again the opposite trend seen with νin 

in the 2PL hardening model, but here it is much more pronounced than for A0-nuvar and more closely resem-bles the low-frequency behavior with νin shown in Figure 4 of NG15Astro. Overall, we see that aGW is still the primary determinant of the overall GWB spectral shape and amplitude, but when astrophysical hardening dom-inates through most of the PTA band, νin significantly modulates the GWB as well. For the stellar-like models with aGW ,9 = 10 3.5Rg (Fig-ure 10b), efficient astrophysical hardening at a > a GW 

is required to avoid binary stalling. This is achieved for 20 L. Blecha 

(a) (b) 

Figure 10. (a) GWB spectra are shown for the Agas model with aGW ,9 = 100R g, for various values of νin . The thick solid line indicates the fiducial value of νin = +2. Lower νin creates stronger low-frequency GWB attenuation. (b) GWB spectra are shown for the Astar model with aGW ,9 = 10 3.5Rg, for varying νin . The thick solid line indicates the fiducial value νin = −1. Larger νin creates high-frequency spectral steepening, with no observable GWB for νin ≥ 0.5. In both the Agas and Astar 

models, the GWB dependence on νin is much larger than in the A0 model, but with opposite trends for the gas-like versus stellar-like models. 

νin ≤ − 0.5, but above this value the inspiral timescales start to exceed tHub , and there is essentially no observ-able GWB for νin > 0. The amplitude drops off starting at the highest frequencies. Once again this behavior dif-fers from the 2PL model used in NG15Astro, where the amplitude decreases with lower νin , but starting from 

low frequencies instead of the high-frequency steepening shown in Figure 10b. Together, Figures 9, 10a & 10b indicate that aGW ,9 generally has a larger effect on the GWB spectrum, but that νin significantly modulates the GWB spectrum for some values of aGW ,9. Variations in both parameters can produce very different GWB spec-tral shapes and amplitudes. 3.6. Connecting to the outer hardening regime 

Continuing analysis of the hardening model param-eters in an inside-out fashion, I now examine the 

A0-rch9var model variants with rchar ,9 ranging from 0.1 pc to 100 pc. (Recall that rchar defines the bound-ary between the inner and outer hardening phases.) Across this factor of 10 3 variation in rchar ,9, the GWB is virtually indistinguishable from the fiducial case 

rchar ,9 = 1 pc; the low-frequency amplitudes vary by 0.1% and the high-frequency amplitudes vary by 2%. The B0-rch9var models are similarly insensitive to 

rchar ,9 (except that in that case, rchar ,9 = 100pc is disal-lowed by the | ˙a|max criterion). The insensitivity of the GWB to rchar ,9 simply reflects that rchar is outside the PTA regime. Its primary impact is to limit the range of other model parameters for which | ˙a(rchar )| < | ˙a|max .Models with steep νin ≲ −1, large rchar , and/or small 

aGW quickly reach unphysical hardening rates. For ex-ample, all of the hardening rates in Figure 9 are well below | ˙a|max , but if rchar were larger by a factor of 

∼ 10 − 100, the steepest νin = −1 models would ex-ceed | ˙a|max at rchar . This motivates a choice of rchar 

that is larger than a(fobs ,min ) but not by a large factor. Finally, I consider the outer astrophysical hardening regime, parameterized by τout . Figure 11 shows the GWB spectra and amplitudes for τout = 0.1 to 10 Gyr in the A0-toutvar models. ˙ a and τin+gw are not shown, be-cause these model variations have identical binary evo-lution at a < r char . τout modulates only the redshift at which each binary enters the inner hardening phase and thus has minimal impact on the GWB spectral shape. Recall that τin+gw ∼ 10 6 yr in the fiducial A0 model, such that τout dominates the total binary inspiral time. The GWB amplitude is largely unaffected until τout 

exceeds several Gyr. For τout = 10 Gyr, binaries forming at z < 1.8 cannot merge by z = 0. This yields an overall drop by a factor of ∼ 4−6 in the GWB amplitude across the spectrum, relative to the fiducial value of 1 Gyr. Be-cause τout primarily impacts the amplitude rather than the shape of the GWB, it is subject to degeneracies with galaxy population parameters that control the number An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 21                    

> (a) (b)
> Figure 11. GWB characteristic strain amplitudes and amplitude ratios are shown for the A0-toutvar model variants with varying τout (the inspiral timescale in the outer astrophysical phase where a > r char ). (a) : the GWB spectra for each model variant are shown in the same manner as in Figure 6c. (b) : the GWB amplitudes and amplitude ratios are shown in the same manner as in Figure 6d. The filled+open circles denote the fiducial value τout = 1 Gyr. The GWB spectra are nearly identical for τout ≤1 Gyr and only slightly attenuated at 10 0.5Gyr. Longer inspiral times attenuate the GWB more significantly, as many binaries are unable to reach the PTA regime by z∼0.

and mass of SMBHBs formed (i.e., the GSMF and the 

MBH − Mbulge parameters). These galactic-scale param-eters are also degenerate among themselves to some ex-tent, and care should always be taken when interpreting the results of SMBHB population parameter inference. 3.7. Comparison to stellar- and gas-driven inspiral 

I now consider how this analytic hardening model re-lates to stellar-driven and gas-driven hardening mech-anisms in the literature. For simplicity and clarity, I vary νin and aGW ,9 while keeping other parameters at their fiducial values. These model variants are intended to be illustrative rather than a precise match of any stellar- or gas-driven hardening models. Of course, real-ity is likely to lie somewhere between the stellar-like and gas-like limits, either because both stars and gas com-monly contribute to binary hardening at PTA frequen-cies, or because the binaries that dominate the GWB include a mixture of stellar-driven and gas-driven sys-tems. Any estimates of aGW ,9 and νin obtained from the GWB using this hardening model will be strain-weighted, population-averaged values. νin also repre-sents the average power-law index of the hardening timescale through the PTA regime, if the true timescale is not described by a single power law. However, the tan-talizing possibility remains that future PTA data sets could constrain the dominant astrophysical hardening channel for SMBHBs in the nHz regime. 3.7.1. Stellar-like hardening models 

Binary inspiral rates are sometimes expressed in terms of the hardening parameter s ≡ d(a−1)/dt . Numerical stellar scattering experiments show that once a hard bi-nary forms, the hardening parameter is roughly constant in the stellar scattering regime (e.g., G. D. Quinlan 1996; A. Sesana & F. M. Khan 2015; F. M. Khan et al. 2018). 

s is also strongly correlated with the density of the stel-lar loss cone (e.g., G. D. Quinlan & L. Hernquist 1997; F. M. Khan et al. 2012; K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. 2025). If the loss cone is depleted by the binary faster than it can be replenished, s will decrease (i.e., binary hardening will slow or stall). In the power-law param-eterization of my hardening model, the constant-s case corresponds to νin = −1. K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. (2025) recently used a large, observationally informed suite of N -body sim-ulations to quantify the dependence of binary merger timescales on host galaxy properties, focusing on binary evolution driven by stellar scattering. Using linear re-gression, K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. (2025) derived a best-fit relation that predicts coalescence time to within a factor of two. 22 L. Blecha 

(a) (b) 

Figure 12. (a) SMBHB hardening rates (top panel) and τin+gw (bottom panel) are shown versus binary separation for three fiducial model variants: A0 (solid blue curves), Astar (dashed green curves), and Agas (dash-dotted purple curves). As in Figure 4, curves for different binary M & q are as indicated in the legends, and vertical lines indicate where binaries of a given mass enter the PTA band. (b) GWB spectra are shown for the same three hardening models, which differ in their aGW ,9 and 

νin values. These parameter variations between the primary fiducial model and its stellar-like and gas-like variants impact both the shape and the amplitude of the resulting GWB spectra. 

For the Astar model in this work, the inner harden-ing parameter ranges from s ∼ 10 −3 (pc Myr) −1 for 

∼ 10 10 M⊙ binaries to s ∼ 10 (pc Myr) −1 for ∼ 10 5M⊙

binaries. ( s varies from ∼ 10 −5-10 2 (pc Myr) −1 across the same mass range in the Bstar model.) This fairly closely traces the range in s measured from the sim-ulations of K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. (2025). C. J. Harris et al. (2026) find a similar range in s for their stellar-scattering models based on IllustisTNG simula-tions and tuned to observed core elliptical galaxy prop-erties. I leave a more detailed comparison to these and other stellar hardening models for future work. Figure 12 shows the hardening rates and GWB spectra for the Astar model with νin = −1 and aGW ,9 = 10 3.5Rg

(green dashed line), compared to the fiducial A0 model with νin = 0 and aGW ,9 = 10 2.5Rg (blue solid line). (The Agas model with νin = +2 and aGW ,9 = 100R g is also shown and discussed in Section 3.7.2.) The GWB amplitude is higher with less low-frequency turnover in the stellar model where τin+gw ∼ few ×10 9 yr, as opposed to τin+gw ∼ 10 6-10 8 yr in the fiducial model. Also, more of the inspiral is GW-driven in the Astar model. This emphasizes a point made above, that the GWB will be highest and closest to a power-law shape when SMBHBs are brought efficiently to the edge of the PTA band and then driven to merger at low redshift by GW emission. The Bstar model behaves similarly. C. J. Harris et al. (2026) also find minimal GWB attenuation in their best-fit stellar-scattering model for SMBHB inspiral. I now consider parameter variations for the Astar and 

Bstar models. Relative to A0 and B0 , these models with 

νin = −1 impose stricter limits on the allowed aGW ,9 for which ˙ a < | ˙a|max , permitting only aGW ,9 ≥ 10 2.25 Rg

and ≥ 10 3.25 Rg, respectively, for Astar-agw9var and 

Bstar-agw9var . In both stellar models, GWB ampli-tudes sharply decline for aGW ,9 ≳ 10 3.5Rg.As discussed in Section 3.5, Figure 10b shows very strong GWB spectral steepening for larger νin in the 

Astar-nuvar models, with similarly large variation in the Bstar-nuvar models. This is because aGW ,9 =10 3.5Rg for the stellar models, causing binaries with slower astrophysical inspiral (larger νin ) to stall outside the PTA regime. As with the fiducial A0-αvar and B0-αvar models, the stellar-like models are largely insensitive to variations in 

αGW . The small impact that αGW does have on the GWB spectra is reversed, however, owing to the longer timescales for all binaries in the stellar models. For An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 23 low αGW , stellar models exhibit high-frequency spectral steepening because τin+gw ≫ tHub for low M , versus the low-frequency attenuation in the A0-αvar because 

τin+gw ≲ tHub for low M . Overall, the dependence on 

αGW is secondary to the dependence on aGW ,9 and νin .The Astar-rch9var models are insensitive to rchar ,9,although here the GWB amplitude variation from 

rchar ,9 = 0 .1 to 100pc is at the ∼ 30% level instead of the ≲ 1% level as for A0-rch9var and B0-rch9var . For the Bstar-rch9var models, rchar ,9 ≥ 10 pc is disallowed by the | ˙a|max criterion. 3.7.2. Gas-like hardening models 

Z. Haiman et al. (2009) presented analytic formu-lae for the evolution of a SMBHB in a circumbinary gas disk, delineating (1) an inner region where radia-tion pressure and electron-scattering opacity dominate, (2) an middle region where gas pressure and electron-scattering opacity dominate, and (3) an outer region where gas pressure and free-free opacity dominate. This prescription has been used in numerous SMBHB inspiral models (e.g., B. Kocsis & A. Sesana 2011; L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017a,b). Assuming that binary evolution is de-termined by the viscous time, they found thard ∝ a7/2

in region 1, ∝ a7/5 in region 2, and ∝ a5/4 in region 3. These scalings correspond to the power-law index νin in my generalized hardening model. The Agas and Bgas 

models use a single intermediate value of νin = 2 as a simple representation of the average evolution of SMB-HBs embedded in a circumbinary gas disk. I also use 

aGW ,9 = 100R g for these gas-like models as a rough es-timate of the point at which the viscous disk timescale and GW inspiral timescale are equal. The purple dot-dashed lines in Figure 12a&b show the Agas model. The gas-like GWB has a lower ampli-tude and flatter spectrum than the fiducial and stellar models, largely because GW emission does not dominate until the final 100R g. Another difference is the sharp-ness of the transition to the GW regime. In the stellar limit, the transition from thard ∝ a−1 to thard ∝ a+4 is dramatic, and the GWB shape is very sensitive to the separation aGW at which this transition happens—more so than in the gas limit where thard transitions from 

∝ a+2 to ∝ a+4 . Nonetheless, the Agas-agw9var and 

Bgas-agw9var models still depend sensitively on aGW ,9.The GWB amplitudes increase by a factor of ∼ 7-14 as aGW ,9 is varied from 10 1.25 Rg to 10 2.5Rg. For larger 

aGW ,9, the GWB amplitude rapidly drops off at high frequencies as more binaries exceed tHub . There is no observable GWB for aGW ,9 > 1000R g.Because binaries in the gas-like models are driven by astrophysics until 100R g, fast astrophysical hardening (lower νin ) causes strong GWB attenuation (Figure 10a). The Bgas-nuvar models show similar attenuation for larger νin , but in that case νin ≤ 0 is disallowed by 

| ˙a|max . In both the stellar-like and the gas-like model variants, the variation with νin is significantly stronger than in the A0-nuvar and B0-nuvar models, which rep-resent a “middle-ground” in ( aGW , νin ) space between these stellar and gas limits. The gas-like models are largely insensitive to variations in αGW . When rchar ,9

is increased above the fiducial value of 1 pc, τin+gw ex-ceeds tHub starting from low binary masses. This causes a sharp drop in the GWB at high frequencies, and no GWB is observable for rchar ,9 > 10 pc. This simple parameterization of binary hardening, in which it is assumed that ˙ a is always negative, cannot capture the possibility of binary orbital expansion (e.g., D. J. Mu˜ noz et al. 2019; M. S. L. Moody et al. 2019). Because I assume a single power-law for ˙ ain versus a,the case of positive torques from a circumbinary gas disk would effectively yield a slower average inner hardening rate, corresponding to larger values of aGW and/or νin . 

> 4.

DISCUSSION Here I briefly outline possibilities for the extension of this inside-out hardening model to include nonzero orbital eccentricity. I also discuss the applicability of this method to LISA predictions and implications for multi-messenger sources. 4.1. Eccentric binaries 

Although only circular binaries are considered in this work, numerous studies of stellar- and gas-driven eccen-tricity indicate that SMBH binaries may have nonneg-ligible eccentricities when they enter the PTA regime (e.g., A. Sesana 2010; K. Holley-Bockelmann & F. M. Khan 2015; F. M. Khan et al. 2018; J. Zrake et al. 2021; D. J. D’Orazio & P. C. Duffell 2021; M. Siwek et al. 2023b). Triple SMBH interactions can also drive bina-ries to high eccentricities (M. Bonetti et al. 2016). The inside-out hardening model can be readily extended to include eccentricity evolution with a few considerations. 

νin could be defined as the value for circular binaries, and aGW ,9 should be defined more precisely as the sepa-ration at which a circular M = 10 9M⊙ binary enters the GW-dominated regime. Since eccentric binaries harden faster via GW emission, they would transition to the GW regime earlier (at separations larger than aGW ). A subtler consideration for eccentric binaries is the choice of rchar . Here I have chosen rchar such that the inner hardening regime begins prior to when (circular) binaries reach PTA frequencies, even for a future 100-yr data set. However, eccentric binaries will emit not only 24 L. Blecha 

at twice the orbital frequency, but also at higher har-monics. If the eccentricity is not very high ( e ≲ 0.95), this causes a slight attenuation of the low-frequency GWB and a modest increase of the high-frequency am-plitude (L. Z. Kelley et al. 2017b). This also means that eccentric binaries will enter the PTA band at larger semi-major axes than circular binaries. Accounting for this effect would require choosing larger values of rchar 

(thereby restricting the space for other hardening pa-rameters to satisfy | ˙a(rchar )| < | ˙a|max ), ignoring the con-tribution of higher harmonics from wide, eccentric bina-ries to the low-frequency GWB (which may be small but cannot a priori be assumed negligible), or abandoning the premise of a single value of νin for all binaries. Fur-ther exploration of this issue is left for future work. 4.2. Applications to the LISA regime 

This model can be applied to calculations of LISA event rates, although there are important differences to bear in mind. The huge difference in relevant masses and frequencies for PTAs versus LISA challenges the assumption that a single value for each binary harden-ing parameter can represent all binaries. The nHz GWB from SMBHBs is dominated by the most massive bina-ries ( ≳ 10 9M⊙) at relatively low redshifts. Thus, it is not unreasonable to assume that the binaries dominat-ing the GWB have similarities in their hardening param-eters. It is much less clear whether ∼ 10 4 − 10 7M⊙ bi-naries merging at higher redshifts should be expected to share the same hardening parameters. Caution should therefore be used when applying PTA-constrained hard-ening parameters to the LISA regime. Binaries enter the mHz frequency regime late in their inspiral, and only lower-mass SMBHBs will reach the LISA band at all before merging. Thus, the details of inner SMBHB hardening are important mainly for de-termining the merger timescale. As discussed above, the merger rate is much more sensitive to binary inspiral timescales than is the nHz GWB amplitude. Nonethe-less, because LISA event rates remain highly uncertain, any constraints from PTA data on SMBH merger rates for LISA (even weak ones) will be valuable. 4.3. Implications for multi-messenger astrophysics 

A SMBHB that is simultaneously accreting gas and emitting GWs could appear as a multi-messenger source, which would provide a wealth of information about SMBH accretion, environments, and binary inspiral, in addition to opening a new regime of precision cosmology. The question of whether gaseous or stellar processes dominate SMBHB environments is important for their EM signatures in addition to their inspiral rates. It is possible that the massive SMBHBs dominating the nHz GWB are preferentially hosted in gas-poor, early-type galaxies, greatly lowering the likelihood of observing EM accretion signatures. In systems with plentiful cold nu-clear gas that drives SMBHB inspiral, EM counterparts are more likely. However, observing distinct variability signatures of the binary orbital motion presents numer-ous challenges including host contamination, obscura-tion, and years-long required observation times. A concern for multi-messenger observations of LISA sources is that even if gas drives SMBHBs nearly all the way to merger, if the gas cannot follow the SMBHBs to fuel accretion after they enter the GW regime, the merger event may be EM-dark (e.g., M. Milosavljevi´ c & E. S. Phinney 2005). Recent simulations indicate that SMBHBs can accrete from their individual “mini-disks” well after their inspiral starts to outpace the viscous disk evolution (e.g., S. C. Noble et al. 2012; B. D. Farris et al. 2015; D. B. Bowen et al. 2017; Y. Tang et al. 2018), and EM signatures may also arise from shocks in radiatively inefficient flows (e.g., T. Bode et al. 2010; B. D. Farris et al. 2010) or jets launched during the merger (e.g., R. Gold et al. 2014; V. Paschalidis et al. 2021). Thus, an inspiral model with aGW > r ISCO does not necessarily indicate EM-dark mergers. For PTAs, multi-messenger studies have the advan-tage that SMBHB sources are essentially stationary on human timescales ( τin+gw ≫ τorb ). If individual loud CW sources can be identified above the GWB (e.g., V. Ravi et al. 2012; L. Z. Kelley et al. 2018; G. Agazie et al. 2023c; E. C. Gardiner et al. 2024), targeted searches for EM counterparts and/or likely host galaxies are a promising avenue for multi-messenger science (P. Petrov et al. 2024; E. C. Gardiner et al. 2025; N. Agarwal et al. 2026). If PTA data are able to constrain the domi-nant astrophysical hardening mechanism even weakly, this will inform the prospects for EM counterparts. But given the large uncertainties and complexity of the rel-evant physical processes, a result that points to stellar-driven hardening should not be taken as strong evidence that EM counterparts to SMBHBs will not be found.  

> 5.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS I present an analytic model for SMBHB inspiral de-signed to optimize physical constraints obtained from PTA observations of the nHz GWB. Because PTAs probe the innermost phase of SMBHB inspiral, I model this regime in detail while using a simple delay timescale to connect the inner regime to a cosmological SMBHB population at large scales. Central to my approach is recognition that the GWB amplitude and spectral shape are quite sensitive to the binary semi-major axis aGW at An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 25 which inspiral transitions from the astrophysical to GW-driven regime, and that this quantity should therefore be treated as a free parameter to be constrained with PTA data. I refer to this approach as an “inside-out” model for SMBHB inspiral. The sensitivity of the GWB to aGW arises from the strong dependence of GW-driven inspiral on binary sep-aration ( ˙ aGW ∝ a−3) and from the requirement that if a GWB is observed, aGW must be neither far outside the PTA regime nor close to rISCO for most binaries. Because GW-driven inspiral also depends strongly on binary mass and mass ratio ( ˙ aGW ∝ ηM 3), I parame-terize aGW (in gravitational units) as a function of both quantities, normalized to 10 9M⊙, equal-mass binaries: 

aGW = aGW ,9M αGW  

> 9

(4 η)βGW .The inspiral rate at a > a GW is modeled as a sin-gle power law, ˙ a ∝ a1−νin . This is referred to as the “inner” astrophysical hardening regime, and if multiple processes (i.e., gas and stars) contribute to binary inspi-ral in this phase, νin will capture the average hardening rate driven by these processes. The boundary of the in-ner regime is set by rchar , which should be outside the PTA regime, but not by a large factor. A binary sep-aration of rchar ,9 = 1 pc is comfortably larger than the point at which circular, 10 9M⊙ SMBHBs enter the PTA regime, even with a hypothetical 100-yr PTA data set. I do not explicitly model SMBHB hardening rates far outside the PTA regime. The outer phase of binary evo-lution is modeled as a delay timescale τout between the time of binary formation (or the time of galaxy merger) and the time at which it reaches rchar . rchar also scales with mass, and I choose a scaling that guarantees all bi-naries obey rchar > a (fobs ,min ), where fobs ,min = 1 /T obs 

is the minimum GW frequency accessible to a PTA with an observation time of Tobs .The allowed parameter values are limited such that the binary hardening rate never exceeds | ˙a|max . I use 

| ˙a|max = c for simplicity, but a more realistic limit such as | ˙a|max = vorb (a) could also be used. The results are not very sensitive to this choice, as models with large | ˙a|

emit little GW radiation through the PTA regime. This model has similar complexity and form to the 2PL model used in NG15Astro. However, the fixed to-tal timescale in that model imposes a normalization on hardening rates at all scales, which artificially suppresses variation in the inner regime to which PTAs are most sensitive. I also compare another simple “inside-out” approach that is widely used: the E. S. Phinney (2001) calculation for a GWB arising from SMBHBs inpsiral-ing via GW emission alone, working backwards from a merger remnant density. This approach cannot account for how SMBHBs reach the PTA regime, nor whether astrophysical hardening attenuates the low-frequency GWB. However, there is a minimum binary mass for which this approach is self-consistent even within the PTA regime. For current PTA data, this mass thresh-old is M ≳ few ×10 8M⊙; lower-mass SMBHBs cannot merge by z = 0 via GWs alone, starting from the lowest frequencies accessible to PTAs. NG15Astro find that such binaries contribute < 1% to the GWB, but the mass threshold increases as T 8/5obs . This further moti-vates an SMBHB hardening model that accounts for as-trophysical processes but retains enough simplicity to be used in parameter inference of GW source populations. My central findings can be summarized as follows. 

• Only values of aGW ,9 ∼ 20-6000R g are consistent with the existence of an observable GWB pro-duced by SMBHBs, across a wide range in other model parameters. Moreover, for a given set of other parameters, viable aGW ,9 values are con-strained to within a factor of ∼ 30-100. Within this narrow range the GWB amplitude and spec-tral shape varies significantly. The GWB ampli-tude peaks, and the spectrum most closely resem-bles a power-law, for aGW ,9 ∼ 500-2000R g.

• When aGW ,9 is near the values that maximize the GWB amplitude, the GWB spectrum is rel-atively insensitive to νin . However, models with large aGW ,9 and large positive νin cause binaries to stall outside the PTA regime. Conversely, for small aGW ,9 and νin , rapid inspiral causes strong attenuation of the low-frequency GWB, and al-lowed models are strongly constrained by | ˙a|max .

• The GWB is insensitive to βGW , the mass-ratio scaling of aGW , and it is only weakly sensitive to the mass scaling αGW . Steep scalings of either pa-rameter (e.g., |αGW |, |βGW | ≳ 1/2) yield a GWB that arises entirely from a narrow range of SMBHB masses or mass ratios, or more often, such models are disallowed by the | ˙a|max criterion. 

• Total inspiral timescales are much more sensitive to αGW and βGW than the GWB is. These pa-rameters are thus more important for LISA pre-dictions. CW detection probabilities for individ-ual SMBHBs may also be more sensitive to the mass and mass-ratio scaling of aGW , relative to the unresolved stochastic background. 

• The GWB is largely insensitive to the boundary between the outer and inner hardening phases, 

rchar . This is true as long as rchar is not so large that satisfying | ˙a| < | ˙a|max at rchar imposes strong 26 L. Blecha 

limits on the allowed ranges of other parameters. The outer phase timescale τout does not strongly impact the GWB unless τout ≳ 3 Gyr, at which point the amplitude drops as more and more low-redshift binaries stall. 

• I examine combinations of the key model parame-ters aGW and νin that are tuned to resemble liter-ature models for stellar- and gas-driven evolution, finding reasonable agreement between my stellar-like models and N -body simulation results (K. Holley-Bockelmann et al. 2025; C. J. Harris et al. 2026). Although more study is needed, PTA con-straints on aGW and/or νin would point towards the SMBHB hardening mechanism that dominates through the nHz regime. This simple, computationally inexpensive framework isolates the parameters that are critical to late-stage SMBHB inspiral, where SMBHBs are emitting at PTA frequencies and where very few EM constraints exist. Future work will extend the model to include nonzero binary eccentricities and to predictions for low-mass binary mergers detectable with LISA. This inside-out SMBHB hardening model can be readily applied to cur-rent and future PTA data sets to infer the nature of the cosmic SMBHB population that is the likely source of the observed GWB. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I thank Kayhan G¨ ultekin and Cayenne Matt for helpful discussions, and I thank Kayhan G¨ ultekin, Joseph Lazio, Cayenne Matt, and Alexander Criswell for thoughtful comments that significantly improved this manuscript. I gratefully acknowledge support from NSF awards AST-2307171, AST-2509457, and PHY-2607948. APPENDIX  

> A.

AN ALTERNATE PARAMETERIZATION OF THE INSIDE-OUT HARDENING MODEL Here I present an alternate parameterization of the inside-out hardening model that uses ˙ a(rchar ) (the hardening rate of equal-mass binaries at rchar ) as an input model parameter instead of νin . This could be useful if one wishes to consider binary models that have a common inspiral rate at the start of the inner regime, rather than a common power-law index within the inner regime. It also has the advantage that the | ˙a|max criterion is automatically satisfied as long as | ˙a(rchar )| < | ˙a|max . In this case, νin is defined via 

νin = 1 − log 10 | ˙a(rchar )| − log 10 | ˙aGW |

log 10 rchar − log 10 aGW 

(A1) I assume that ˙ a(rchar ) for unequal-mass binaries has the same scaling with η as does ˙ a(aGW ), such that the value of 

νin is constant for binaries of a given primary mass. Because νin is derived from ˙ a(rchar ), the |νin |max criterion must be expressed in terms of limits on allowed values of ˙a(rchar ) as follows: log 10 | ˙a(rchar )| > − log 10 (4 η) + (1 − | νin |max ) log 10 

 rchar 

aGW 



+ log 10 ˙a(aGW ) and log 10 | ˙a(rchar )| < min 



− log 10 (4 η) + (1 + |νin |max ) log 10 

 rchar 

aGW 



+ log 10 ˙a(aGW ), log 10 | ˙a|max 



. (A2) This criterion is especially important for the ˙ a(rchar ) parameterization to prevent numerical instabilities when rchar ∼

aGW , or | ˙a(rchar )| ≫ or ≪ | ˙aGW |.To summarize, the inputs for this ˙ a(rchar ) hardening model parameterization are ˙ a(rchar ), aGW , rchar , and τout . As in the standard parameterization presented in the main text, aGW is specified by three parameters that control its scaling with mass and mass ratio ( aGW ,9, αGW , & βGW ), while two parameters control the mass scaling of rchar .REFERENCES 

> Afzal, A., Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., et al. 2023, ApJL, 951, L11, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acdc91 Agarwal, N., Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., et al. 2026, ApJL, 998, L11, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae3719

An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 27 

Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023a, ApJL, 951, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acdac6 Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023b, ApJL, 952, L37, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace18b Agazie, G., Anumarlapudi, A., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2023c, ApJL, 951, L50, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace18a Amaro-Seoane, P., Audley, H., Babak, S., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1702.00786. https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.00786 Amaro-Seoane, P., Andrews, J., Arca Sedda, M., et al. 2023, Living Reviews in Relativity, 26, 2, doi: 10.1007/s41114-022-00041-y Armitage, P. J., & Natarajan, P. 2002, ApJL, 567, L9, doi: 10.1086/339770 Barausse, E. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 2533, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21057.x Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., & Rees, M. J. 1980, Nature, 287, 307, doi: 10.1038/287307a0 Berczik, P., Merritt, D., Spurzem, R., & Bischof, H.-P. 2006, ApJL, 642, L21, doi: 10.1086/504426 Blecha, L., Cox, T. J., Loeb, A., & Hernquist, L. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 2154, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.18042.x Bode, T., Haas, R., Bogdanovi´ c, T., Laguna, P., & Shoemaker, D. 2010, ApJ, 715, 1117, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/1117 Bogdanovi´ c, T., Miller, M. C., & Blecha, L. 2022, Living Reviews in Relativity, 25, 3, doi: 10.1007/s41114-022-00037-8 Bonetti, M., Haardt, F., Sesana, A., & Barausse, E. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 4419, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1590 Bonetti, M., Haardt, F., Sesana, A., & Barausse, E. 2018a, MNRAS, 477, 3910, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty896 Bonetti, M., Sesana, A., Barausse, E., & Haardt, F. 2018b, MNRAS, 477, 2599, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty874 Bonetti, M., Sesana, A., Haardt, F., Barausse, E., & Colpi, M. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 4044, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz903 Bonoli, S., Izquierdo-Villalba, D., Spinoso, D., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2509.12325, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.12325 Bowen, D. B., Campanelli, M., Krolik, J. H., Mewes, V., & Noble, S. C. 2017, ApJ, 838, 42, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa63f3 Burke-Spolaor, S. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 2113, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17586.x Charisi, M., Bartos, I., Haiman, Z., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 463, 2145, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1838 Colpi, M. 2014, SSRv, 183, 189, doi: 10.1007/s11214-014-0067-1 Comerford, J. M., & Simon, J. 2025, ApJ, 994, 168, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1133 D’Orazio, D. J., & Duffell, P. C. 2021, ApJL, 914, L21, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0621 D’Orazio, D. J., Haiman, Z., & Schiminovich, D. 2015, Nature, 525, 351, doi: 10.1038/nature15262 Duffell, P. C., D’Orazio, D., Derdzinski, A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 901, 25, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abab95 EPTA Collaboration, InPTA Collaboration, Antoniadis, J., et al. 2023, A&A, 678, A50, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346844 EPTA Collaboration, InPTA Collaboration, Antoniadis, J., et al. 2024, A&A, 685, A94, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347433 Eracleous, M., Boroson, T. A., Halpern, J. P., & Liu, J. 2012, ApJS, 201, 23, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/201/2/23 Escala, A., Larson, R. B., Coppi, P. S., & Mardones, D. 2005, ApJ, 630, 152, doi: 10.1086/431747 Farris, B. D., Duffell, P., MacFadyen, A. I., & Haiman, Z. 2014, ApJ, 783, 134, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/783/2/134 Farris, B. D., Duffell, P., MacFadyen, A. I., & Haiman, Z. 2015, MNRAS, 447, L80, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slu184 Farris, B. D., Liu, Y. T., & Shapiro, S. L. 2010, PhRvD, 81, 084008, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.81.084008 Gardiner, E. C. 2026, in preparation Gardiner, E. C., B´ ecsy, B., Kelley, L. Z., & Cornish, N. J. 2025, ApJ, 988, 222, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade4c2 Gardiner, E. C., Kelley, L. Z., Lemke, A.-M., & Mitridate, A. 2024, ApJ, 965, 164, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2be8 Gold, R., Paschalidis, V., Etienne, Z. B., Shapiro, S. L., & Pfeiffer, H. P. 2014, PhRvD, 89, 064060, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.89.064060 Gualandris, A., Read, J. I., Dehnen, W., & Bortolas, E. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 464, 2301, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2528 Haiman, Z., Kocsis, B., & Menou, K. 2009, ApJ, 700, 1952, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/700/2/1952 Harris, C. J., G¨ ultekin, K., & Blecha, L. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2601.07762, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2601.07762 Hoffman, L., & Loeb, A. 2007, MNRAS, 377, 957, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.11694.x Holley-Bockelmann, K., G¨ ultekin, K., Shoemaker, D., & Yunes, N. 2008, ApJ, 686, 829, doi: 10.1086/591218 Holley-Bockelmann, K., & Khan, F. M. 2015, ApJ, 810, 139, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/810/2/139 Holley-Bockelmann, K., & Sigurdsson, S. 2006, arXiv e-prints, astro. https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0601520 Holley-Bockelmann, K., Khan, F. M., Williams, I., et al. 2025, ApJL, 995, L32, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae1ccd 28 L. Blecha 

Izquierdo-Villalba, D., Sesana, A., Bonoli, S., & Colpi, M. 2022, MNRAS, 509, 3488, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3239 Katz, M. L., Kelley, L. Z., Dosopoulou, F., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 2301, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3102 Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., & Hernquist, L. 2017a, MNRAS, 464, 3131, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2452 Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., Hernquist, L., Sesana, A., & Taylor, S. R. 2017b, MNRAS, 471, 4508, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1638 Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., Hernquist, L., Sesana, A., & Taylor, S. R. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 964, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty689 Kelley, L. Z., Gardiner, E. C., Wright, D., et al. 2024, nanograv/holodeck: v1.5.2, v1.5.2 Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.10966412 Khan, F. M., Berczik, P., & Just, A. 2018, A&A, 615, A71, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730489 Khan, F. M., Holley-Bockelmann, K., Berczik, P., & Just, A. 2013, ApJ, 773, 100, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/773/2/100 Khan, F. M., Just, A., & Merritt, D. 2011, ApJ, 732, 89, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/732/2/89 Khan, F. M., Preto, M., Berczik, P., et al. 2012, ApJ, 749, 147, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/749/2/147 Kocsis, B., & Sesana, A. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 1467, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17782.x Kormendy, J., & Ho, L. C. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082708-101811 Laal, N., Taylor, S. R., Matt, C., & G¨ ultekin, K. 2026, The Astrophysical Journal, 1004, 90, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae6cea Laal, N., Taylor, S. R., Kelley, L. Z., et al. 2025, ApJ, 982, 55, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb4ef Lai, D., & Mu˜ noz, D. J. 2023, ARA&A, 61, 517, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052622-022933 Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2020, ApJ, 893, 111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7e27 Li, K., Bogdanovi´ c, T., Ballantyne, D. R., & Bonetti, M. 2023, ApJ, 959, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad04d2 Liepold, E. R., & Ma, C.-P. 2024, ApJL, 971, L29, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad66b8 MacFadyen, A. I., & Milosavljevi´ c, M. 2008, ApJ, 672, 83, doi: 10.1086/523869 Matt, C., G¨ ultekin, K., Kelley, L. Z., et al. 2026a, ApJ, 997, 188, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae2480 Matt, C., G¨ ultekin, K., Agazie, G., et al. 2026b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.11167, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.11167 Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Madau, P., et al. 2007, Science, 316, 1874, doi: 10.1126/science.1141858 Merritt, D., & Milosavljevi´ c, M. 2005, Living Reviews in Relativity, 8, 8, doi: 10.12942/lrr-2005-8 Milosavljevi´ c, M., & Phinney, E. S. 2005, ApJL, 622, L93, doi: 10.1086/429618 Moody, M. S. L., Shi, J.-M., & Stone, J. M. 2019, ApJ, 875, 66, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab09ee Mu˜ noz, D. J., Lai, D., Kratter, K., & Mirand a, R. 2020, ApJ, 889, 114, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5d33 Mu˜ noz, D. J., Miranda, R., & Lai, D. 2019, ApJ, 871, 84, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf867 Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Genel, S., et al. 2015, Astronomy and Computing, 13, 12, doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2015.09.003 Noble, S. C., Mundim, B. C., Nakano, H., et al. 2012, ApJ, 755, 51, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/755/1/51 Paschalidis, V., Bright, J., Ruiz, M., & Gold, R. 2021, ApJL, 910, L26, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abee21 Peters, P. C. 1964, Physical Review, 136, 1224, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B1224 Petrov, P., Taylor, S. R., Charisi, M., & Ma, C.-P. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2406.04409, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.04409 Phinney, E. S. 2001, arXiv e-prints, astro, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0108028 Quinlan, G. D. 1996, NewA, 1, 35, doi: 10.1016/S1384-1076(96)00003-6 Quinlan, G. D., & Hernquist, L. 1997, NewA, 2, 533, doi: 10.1016/S1384-1076(97)00039-0 Ravi, V., Wyithe, J. S. B., Hobbs, G., et al. 2012, ApJ, 761, 84, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/761/2/84 Reardon, D. J., Zic, A., Shannon, R. M., et al. 2023, ApJL, 951, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acdd02 Ricarte, A., & Natarajan, P. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 3278, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2448 Rodriguez, C., Taylor, G. B., Zavala, R. T., et al. 2006, ApJ, 646, 49, doi: 10.1086/504825 Rodriguez-Gomez, V., Genel, S., Vogelsberger, M., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 49, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv264 Roebber, E., Holder, G., Holz, D. E., & Warren, M. 2016, ApJ, 819, 163, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/163 Roedig, C., Dotti, M., Sesana, A., Cuadra, J., & Colpi, M. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 3033, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18927.x Satheesh, P., Blecha, L., & Kelley, L. Z. 2025, ApJ, 993, 222, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae0a48 Sato-Polito, G., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2509.08041, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.08041 Sato-Polito, G., Zaldarriaga, M., & Quataert, E. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2312.06756, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2312.06756 An “inside-out” SMBH binary inspiral model 29 

Sato-Polito, G., Zaldarriaga, M., & Quataert, E. 2025, PhRvD, 112, 123018, doi: 10.1103/1br7-s1rc Sesana, A. 2010, ApJ, 719, 851, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/719/1/851 Sesana, A., Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 2006, ApJ, 651, 392, doi: 10.1086/507596 Sesana, A., Haiman, Z., Kocsis, B., & Kelley, L. Z. 2018, ApJ, 856, 42, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaad0f Sesana, A., & Khan, F. M. 2015, MNRAS, 454, L66, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slv131 Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., & Colacino, C. N. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 192, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13682.x Sesana, A., Volonteri, M., & Haardt, F. 2009, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 26, 094033, doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/26/9/094033 Shi, J.-M., Krolik, J. H., Lubow, S. H., & Hawley, J. F. 2012, ApJ, 749, 118, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/749/2/118 Siwek, M., Kelley, L. Z., & Hernquist, L. 2024, MNRAS, 534, 2609, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2251 Siwek, M., Weinberger, R., & Hernquist, L. 2023a, MNRAS, 522, 2707, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1131 Siwek, M., Weinberger, R., Mu˜ noz, D. J., & Hernquist, L. 2023b, MNRAS, 518, 5059, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3263 Tang, Y., Haiman, Z., & MacFadyen, A. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 2249, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty423 Tiede, C., Zrake, J., MacFadyen, A., & Haiman, Z. 2020, ApJ, 900, 43, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aba432 Volonteri, M. 2007, ApJL, 663, L5, doi: 10.1086/519525 Volonteri, M., Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 2003, ApJ, 582, 559, doi: 10.1086/344675 Wyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2003, ApJ, 590, 691, doi: 10.1086/375187 Xu, H., Chen, S., Guo, Y., et al. 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 075024, doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/acdfa5 Yu, Q. 2002, MNRAS, 331, 935, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.05242.x Zrake, J., Tiede, C., MacFadyen, A., & Haiman, Z. 2021, ApJL, 909, L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abdd1c